 
 Unknown 
 Notice – Third-party Canadian citizenship study guides, tests and questions The only official study guide for the citizenship test is Discover Canada: The Rights and Responsibilities of Citizenship , available from Citizenship and Immigration Canada at no cost. If you have applied for citizenship and are preparing for the citizenship test, your primary resource should be the official study guide. If you use any other material to prepare for the citizenship test, you do so at your own risk. 
 © Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, represented by the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration Canada, 2021 
 Discover Canada – The Rights and Responsibilities of Citizenship. 
 Ebook : Ci1-11/2021E-EPUB 
 978-0-660-39275-2 
 2 
 The Oath of Citizenship 
 I swear (or affirm) 
 That I will be faithful 
 And bear true allegiance 
 To Her Majesty 
 Queen Elizabeth the Second 
 Queen of Canada 
 Her Heirs and Successors 
 And that I will faithfully observe 
 The laws of Canada 
 Including the Constitution 
 Which recognizes and affirms 
 The Aboriginal and treaty rights of 
 First Nations, Inuit and Métis peoples 
 And fulfil my duties 
 As a Canadian citizen. 
 Le serment de citoyenneté 
 Je jure (ou j’affirme solennellement) 
 Que je serai fidèle 
 Et porterai sincère allégeance 
 À Sa Majesté 
 La reine Elizabeth Deux 
 Reine du Canada 
 À ses héritiers et successeurs 
 Que j’observerai fidèlement 
 Les lois du Canada 
 Y compris la Constitution 
 Qui reconnaît et confirme les droits 
 Ancestraux ou issus de traités 
 Des Premières Nations, des Inuits et des Métis 
 Et que je remplirai loyalement 
 Mes obligations 
 De citoyen canadien. 
 Understanding the Oath 
 In Canada, we profess our loyalty to a person who represents all Canadians and not to a document such as a constitution, a banner such as a flag, or a geopolitical entity such as a country. In our constitutional monarchy, these elements are encompassed by the Sovereign (Queen or King). It is a remarkably simple yet powerful principle: Canada is personified by the Sovereign just as the Sovereign is personified by Canada. 
 3 
 Message to Our Readers 
 Welcome! It took courage to move to a new country. Your decision to apply for citizenship is another big step. You are becoming part of a great tradition that was built by generations of pioneers before you. Once you have met all the legal requirements, we hope to welcome you as a new citizen with all the rights and responsibilities of citizenship. 
 Canada has welcomed generations of newcomers to our shores to help us build a free, law-abiding and prosperous society. For 400 years, settlers and immigrants have contributed to the diversity and richness of our country, which is built on a proud history and a strong identity. 
 Canada is a constitutional monarchy, a parliamentary democracy and a federal state. 
 Canadians are bound together by a shared commitment to the rule of law and to the institutions of parliamentary government. 
 Canadians take pride in their identity and have made sacrifices to defend their way of life. By coming to Canada and taking this important step toward Canadian citizenship, you are helping to write the continuing story of Canada. 
 Immigrants between the ages of 18 and 54 must have adequate knowledge of English or French in order to become Canadian citizens. You must also learn about voting procedures, Canada’s history, symbols, democratic institutions, geography, and the rights and responsibilities of citizenship. 
 Canadian citizens enjoy many rights, but Canadians also have responsibilities. They must obey Canada’s laws and respect the rights and freedoms of others. 
 This guide will help you prepare to become a Canadian citizen. Good luck! 
 For information about Citizenship and Immigration Canada, visit our website at www.cic.gc.ca. 
 4 
 Applying for Citizenship 
 When you apply for citizenship, officials will check your status, verify that you are not prohibited from applying, and ensure that you meet the requirements. 
 Your application may take several months. Please ensure that the Call Centre always has your correct address while your application is being processed. 
 Citizens take the oath 
 P 
 HOW TO USE THIS BOOKLET TO PREPARE FOR THE CITIZENSHIP TEST 
 This booklet will help you prepare for the citizenship test. You should: Study this guide; 
 Ask a friend or family member to help you practise answering questions about Canada; Call a local school or school board, a college, a community centre or a local organization that provides services to immigrants and ask for information on citizenship classes; Take English or French language classes, which the Government of Canada offers free of charge. 
 ABOUT THE CITIZENSHIP TEST 
 The citizenship test is usually a written test, but it could be an interview. You will be tested on two basic requirements for citizenship: 1) knowledge of Canada and of the rights and responsibilities of citizenship, and 2) adequate knowledge of English or French. Adult applicants 55 years of age and over do not need to write the citizenship test. The Citizenship Regulations provide information on how your ability to meet the knowledge of Canada requirement is determined. 
 All the citizenship test questions are based on the subject areas noted in the Citizenship Regulations , and all required information is provided in this study guide. 
 AFTER THE TEST 
 If you pass the test and meet all the other requirements, you will receive a Notice to Appear to Take the Oath of Citizenship . This document tells you the date, time and place of your citizenship ceremony. 
 5 
 At the ceremony, you will: 
 Take the Oath of Citizenship; 
 Sign the oath form; and 
 Receive your Canadian Citizenship Certificate. 
 If you do not pass the test, you will receive a notification indicating the next steps. 
 You are encouraged to bring your family and friends to celebrate this occasion. 
 6 
 Rights and Responsibilities of 
 Citizenship 
 Canadian citizens have rights and responsibilities. These come to us from our history, are secured by Canadian law, and reflect our shared traditions, identity and values. 
 Canadian law has several sources, including laws passed by Parliament and the provincial legislatures, English common law, the civil code of France and the unwritten constitution that we have inherited from Great Britain. 
 Together, these secure for Canadians an 800-year old tradition of ordered liberty, which dates back to the signing of Magna Carta in 1215 in England (also known as the Great Charter of Freedoms), including: 
 Freedom of conscience and religion; 
 Freedom of thought, belief, opinion and expression, including freedom of speech and of the press; 
 Freedom of peaceful assembly; and 
 Freedom of association. 
 Habeas corpus , the right to challenge unlawful detention by the state, comes from English common law. 
 The Constitution of Canada was amended in 1982 to entrench the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms , which begins with the words, “Whereas Canada is founded upon principles that recognize the supremacy of God and the rule of law.” This phrase underlines the importance of religious traditions to Canadian society and the dignity and worth of the human person. 
 The Charter attempts to summarize fundamental freedoms while also setting out additional rights. The most important of these include: 
 Mobility Rights — Canadians can live and work anywhere they choose in Canada, enter and leave the country freely, and apply for a passport. 
 Aboriginal Peoples’ Rights — The rights guaranteed in the Charter will not adversely affect any treaty or other rights or freedoms of Aboriginal peoples. 
 Official Language Rights and Minority Language Educational Rights — French and English have equal status in Parliament and throughout the government. 
 Multiculturalism — A fundamental characteristic of the Canadian heritage and identity. 
 Canadians celebrate the gift of one another’s presence and work hard to respect pluralism and live in harmony. 
 7 
 Queen Elizabeth II proclaiming the amended Constitution, Ottawa, 1982 
 P 
 The Equality of Women and Men 
 In Canada, men and women are equal under the law. Canada’s openness and generosity do not extend to barbaric cultural practices that tolerate spousal abuse, “honour killings,” female genital mutilation, forced marriage or other gender-based violence. Those guilty of these crimes are severely punished under Canada’s criminal laws. 
 Citizenship Responsibilities 
 In Canada, rights come with responsibilities. These include: Obeying the law — One of Canada’s founding principles is the rule of law. Individuals and governments are regulated by laws and not by arbitrary actions. No person or group is above the law. 
 Taking responsibility for oneself and one’s family — Getting a job, taking care of one’s family and working hard in keeping with one’s abilities are important Canadian values. 
 Work contributes to personal dignity and self-respect, and to Canada’s prosperity. 
 Serving on a jury — When called to do so, you are legally required to serve. Serving on a jury is a privilege that makes the justice system work as it depends on impartial juries made up of citizens. 
 Voting in elections — The right to vote comes with a responsibility to vote in federal, provincial or territorial and local elections. 
 Helping others in the community — Millions of volunteers freely donate their time to help others without pay—helping people in need, assisting at your child’s school, volunteering 8 
 at a food bank or other charity, or encouraging newcomers to integrate. Volunteering is an excellent way to gain useful skills and develop friends and contacts. 
 Protecting and enjoying our heritage and environment — Every citizen has a role to play in avoiding waste and pollution while protecting Canada’s natural, cultural and architectural heritage for future generations. 
 Defending Canada 
 There is no compulsory military service in Canada. However, serving in the regular Canadian Forces (navy, army and air force) is a noble way to contribute to Canada and an excellent career choice (www.forces.ca) . You can serve in your local part-time navy, militia and air reserves and gain valuable experience, skills and contacts. Young people can learn discipline, responsibility and skills by getting involved in the cadets ( www.cadets.ca) . 
 You may also serve in the Coast Guard or emergency services in your community such as a police force or fire department. By helping to protect your community, you follow in the footsteps of Canadians before you who made sacrifices in the service of our country. 
 9 
 Who We Are 
 Canada is known around the world as a strong and free country. Canadians are proud of their unique identity. We have inherited the oldest continuous constitutional tradition in the world. 
 We are the only constitutional monarchy in North America. Our institutions uphold a commitment to Peace, Order and Good Government , a key phrase in Canada’s original constitutional document in 1867, the British North America Act . A belief in ordered liberty, enterprise, hard work and fair play has enabled Canadians to build a prosperous society in a rugged environment from our Atlantic shores to the Pacific Ocean and to the Arctic Circle—so much so that poets and songwriters have hailed Canada as the “Great Dominion.” 
 To understand what it means to be Canadian, it is important to know about our three founding peoples— Aboriginal, French and British. 
 (From Left to Right) 
 Métis from Alberta / Cree dancer 
 P 
 ABORIGINAL PEOPLES 
 The ancestors of Aboriginal peoples are believed to have migrated from Asia many thousands of years ago. They were well established here long before explorers from Europe first came to North America. Diverse, vibrant First Nations cultures were rooted in religious beliefs about their relationship to the Creator, the natural environment and each other. 
 Aboriginal and treaty rights are in the Canadian Constitution. Territorial rights were first guaranteed through the Royal Proclamation of 1763 by King George III, and established the basis for negotiating treaties with the newcomers—treaties that were not always fully respected. 
 From the 1800s until the 1980s, the federal government placed many Aboriginal children in residential schools to educate and assimilate them into mainstream Canadian culture. The schools were poorly funded and inflicted hardship on the students; some were physically abused. Aboriginal languages and cultural practices were mostly prohibited. In 2008, Ottawa formally apologized to the former students. 
 In today’s Canada, Aboriginal peoples enjoy renewed pride and confidence, and have made significant achievements in agriculture, the environment, business and the arts. 
 Today, the term Aboriginal peoples refers to three distinct groups: Indian refers to all Aboriginal people who are not Inuit or Métis. In the 1970s, the term First 10 
 Nations began to be used. Today, about half of First Nations people live on reserve land in about 600 communities while the other half live off-reserve, mainly in urban centres. 
 The Inuit, which means “the people” in the Inuktitut language, live in small, scattered communities across the Arctic. Their knowledge of the land, sea and wildlife enabled them to adapt to one of the harshest environments on earth. 
 The Métis are a distinct people of mixed Aboriginal and European ancestry, the majority of whom live in the Prairie provinces. They come from both French- and English-speaking backgrounds and speak their own dialect, Michif. 
 About 65% of the Aboriginal people are First Nations, while 30% are Métis and 4% Inuit. 
 (From Left to Right) 
 Inuit children in Iqaluit, Nunavut 
 Haida artist Bill Reid carves a totem pole 
 P 
 Unity in Diversity 
 John Buchan, the 1st Baron Tweedsmuir, was a popular Governor General of Canada (1935– 
 40). Immigrant groups, he said, “should retain their individuality and each make its contribution to the national character.” Each could learn “from the other, and … while they cherish their own special loyalties and traditions, they cherish not less that new loyalty and tradition which springs from their union.” (Canadian Club of Halifax, 1937). The 15th Governor General is shown here in Blood (Kainai First Nation) headdress. 
 John Buchan, the 1st Baron Tweedsmuir, was a popular Governor General of Canada (1935–40). 
 P 
 11 
 ENGLISH AND FRENCH 
 Canadian society today stems largely from the English-speaking and French-speaking Christian civilizations that were brought here from Europe by settlers. English and French define the reality of day-to-day life for most people and are the country’s official languages. 
 The federal government is required by law to provide services throughout Canada in English and French. 
 Today, there are 18 million Anglophones—people who speak English as a first language—and seven million Francophones—people who speak French as their first language. While the majority of Francophones live in the province of Quebec, one million Francophones live in Ontario, New Brunswick and Manitoba, with a smaller presence in other provinces. New Brunswick is the only officially bilingual province. 
 The Acadians are the descendants of French colonists who began settling in what are now the Maritime provinces in 1604. Between 1755 and 1763, during the war between Britain and France, more than two-thirds of the Acadians were deported from their homeland. Despite this ordeal, known as the “Great Upheaval,” the Acadians survived and maintained their unique identity. Today, Acadian culture is flourishing and is a lively part of French-speaking Canada. 
 Quebecers are the people of Quebec, the vast majority French-speaking. Most are descendants of 8,500 French settlers from the 1600s and 1700s and maintain a unique identity, culture and language. The House of Commons recognized in 2006 that the Quebecois form a nation within a united Canada. One million Anglo-Quebecers have a heritage of 250 
 years and form a vibrant part of the Quebec fabric. 
 The basic way of life in English-speaking areas was established by hundreds of thousands of English, Welsh, Scottish and Irish settlers, soldiers and migrants from the 1600s to the 20th century. Generations of pioneers and builders of British origins, as well as other groups, invested and endured hardship in laying the foundations of our country. This helps explain why Anglophones (English speakers) are generally referred to as English Canadians. 
 (From Left to Right) 
 St. Patrick’s Day Parade, Montreal, Quebec 
 Highland dancer at Glengarry Highland Games, Maxville, Ontario Celebrating Fête Nationale, Gatineau, Quebec 
 Acadian fiddler, Village of Grande-Anse, New Brunswick 
 P 
 Becoming Canadian 
 Some Canadians immigrate from places where they have experienced warfare or conflict. 
 12 
 Such experiences do not justify bringing to Canada violent, extreme or hateful prejudices. In becoming Canadian, newcomers are expected to embrace democratic principles such as the rule of law. 
 Celebration of Cultures, Edmonton, Alberta 
 PP 
 (From Left to Right) 
 Ismaili Muslims in the Calgary Stampede, Alberta 
 Caribbean cultural festival,Toronto, Ontario 
 Ukrainian Pysanka Festival, Vegreville, Alberta 
 Young Polish dancers in Oliver, British Columbia 
 P 
 DIVERSITY IN CANADA 
 The majority of Canadians were born in this country and this has been true since the 1800s. 
 However, Canada is often referred to as a land of immigrants because, over the past 200 
 years, millions of newcomers have helped to build and defend our way of life. 
 Many ethnic and religious groups live and work in peace as proud Canadians. The largest groups are the English, French, Scottish, Irish, German, Italian, Chinese, Aboriginal, Ukrainian, Dutch, South Asian and Scandinavian. Since the 1970s, most immigrants have come from Asian countries. 
 13 
 Pipes and drums in Ottawa 
 p 
 Non-official languages are widely spoken in Canadian homes. Chinese languages are the second most-spoken at home, after English, in two of Canada’s biggest cities. In Vancouver, 13% of the population speak Chinese languages at home; in Toronto, the number is 7%. 
 The great majority of Canadians identify as Christians. The largest religious affiliation is Catholic, followed by various Protestant churches. The numbers of Muslims, Jews, Hindus, Sikhs and members of other religions, as well as people who state “no religion” are also growing. 
 In Canada the state has traditionally partnered with faith communities to promote social welfare, harmony and mutual respect; to provide schools and health care; to resettle refugees; and to uphold religious freedom, religious expression and freedom of conscience. 
 Canada’s diversity includes gay and lesbian Canadians, who enjoy the full protection of and equal treatment under the law, including access to civil marriage. 
 Together, these diverse groups, sharing a common Canadian identity, make up today’s 14 
 multicultural society. 
 (From Left to Right) 
 Christmas in Gatineau | Chinese-Canadian war veterans | Notre-Dame-des-Victoires, Québec City | Chinese New Year celebration, Vancouver 
 P 
 Olympian Marjorie Turner-Bailey of Nova Scotia is a descendant of black Loyalists, escaped slaves and freed men and women of African origin who in the 1780s fled to Canada from America, where slavery remained legal until 1863 
 p 
 15 
 Canada’s History 
 ABORIGINAL PEOPLES 
 When Europeans explored Canada they found all regions occupied by native peoples they called Indians, because the first explorers thought they had reached the East Indies. The native people lived off the land, some by hunting and gathering, others by raising crops. The Huron-Wendat of the Great Lakes region, like the Iroquois, were farmers and hunters. The Cree and Dene of the Northwest were hunter-gatherers. The Sioux were nomadic, following the bison (buffalo) herd. The Inuit lived off Arctic wildlife. West Coast natives preserved fish by drying and smoking. Warfare was common among Aboriginal groups as they competed for land, resources and prestige. 
 The arrival of European traders, missionaries, soldiers and colonists changed the native way of life forever. Large numbers of Aboriginals died of European diseases to which they lacked immunity. However, Aboriginals and Europeans formed strong economic, religious and military bonds in the first 200 years of coexistence which laid the foundations of Canada. 
 John Cabot, an Italian immigrant to England, was the first to map Canada’s Atlantic shore, setting foot on Newfoundland or Cape Breton Island in 1497 and claiming the New Founde Land for England. English settlement did not begin until 1610 
 p 
 16 
 Indian encampment, fur trade era 
 THE FIRST EUROPEANS 
 The Vikings from Iceland who colonized Greenland 1,000 years ago also reached Labrador and the island of Newfoundland. The remains of their settlement, l’Anse aux Meadows, are a World Heritage site. 
 European exploration began in earnest in 1497 with the expedition of John Cabot, who was the first to draw a map of Canada’s East Coast. 
 EXPLORING A RIVER, NAMING CANADA 
 Between 1534 and 1542, Jacques Cartier made three voyages across the Atlantic, claiming the land for King Francis I of France. Cartier heard two captured guides speak the Iroquoian word kanata , meaning “village.” By the 1550s, the name of Canada began appearing on maps. 
 Jacques Cartier was the first European to explore the St. Lawrence River and to set eyes on present-day Québec City and Montreal 
 p 
 ROYAL NEW FRANCE 
 In 1604, the first European settlement north of Florida was established by French explorers Pierre de Monts and Samuel de Champlain, first on St. Croix Island (in present-day Maine), then at Port-Royal, in Acadia (present-day Nova Scotia). In 1608 Champlain built a fortress at what is now Québec city. The colonists struggled against a harsh climate. Champlain allied the colony with the Algonquin, Montagnais and Huron, historic enemies of the Iroquois, a confederation of five (later six) First Nations who battled with the French settlements for a century. The French and the Iroquois made peace in 1701. 
 The French and Aboriginal people collaborated in the vast fur-trade economy, driven by the demand for beaver pelts in Europe. Outstanding leaders like Jean Talon, Bishop Laval, and Count Frontenac built a French Empire in North America that reached from Hudson Bay to the Gulf of Mexico. 
 STRUGGLE FOR A CONTINENT 
 In 1670, King Charles II of England granted the Hudson’s Bay Company exclusive trading rights over the watershed draining into Hudson Bay. For the next 100 years the Company competed with Montreal-based traders. The skilled and courageous men who travelled by canoe were called voyageurs and coureurs des bois , and formed strong alliances with First 17 
 Nations. 
 English colonies along the Atlantic seaboard, dating from the early 1600s, eventually became richer and more populous than New France. In the 1700s France and Great Britain battled for control of North America. In 1759, the British defeated the French in the Battle of the Plains of Abraham at Québec City — marking the end of France’s empire in America. The commanders of both armies, Brigadier James Wolfe and the Marquis de Montcalm, were killed leading their troops in battle. 
 THE PROVINCE OF QUEBEC 
 Following the war, Great Britain renamed the colony the “Province of Quebec.” The French-speaking Catholic people, known as habitants or Canadiens , strove to preserve their way of life in the English-speaking, Protestant-ruled British Empire. 
 A TRADITION OF ACCOMMODATION 
 To better govern the French Roman Catholic majority, the British Parliament passed the Quebec Act of 1774. One of the constitutional foundations of Canada, the Quebec Act accommodated the principles of British institutions to the reality of the province. It allowed religious freedom for Catholics and permitted them to hold public office, a practice not then allowed in Britain. The Quebec Act restored French civil law while maintaining British criminal law. 
 UNITED EMPIRE LOYALISTS 
 In 1776, the thirteen British colonies to the south of Quebec declared independence and formed the United States. North America was again divided by war. More than 40,000 people loyal to the Crown, called “Loyalists,” fled the oppression of the American Revolution to settle in Nova Scotia and Quebec. Joseph Brant led thousands of Loyalist Mohawk Indians into Canada. The Loyalists came from Dutch, German, British, Scandinavian, Aboriginal and other origins and from Presbyterian, Anglican, Baptist, Methodist, Jewish, Quaker and Catholic religious backgrounds. About 3,000 black Loyalists, freedmen and slaves came north seeking a better life. In turn, in 1792, some black Nova Scotians, who were given poor land, moved on to establish Freetown, Sierra Leone (West Africa), a new British colony for freed slaves. 
 (From Left to Right) 
 Count Frontenac refused to surrender Quebec to the English in 1690, saying: “My only reply will be from the mouths of my cannons!” 
 Pierre Le Moyne, Sieur d’Iberville, was a great hero of New France, winning many victories over the English, from James Bay in the north to Nevis in the Caribbean, in the late 17th and early 18th centuries Sir Guy Carleton (Lord Dorchester), as Governor of Quebec, defended the rights of the Canadiens, defeated an American military invasion of Quebec in 1775, and supervised the Loyalist migration to Nova Scotia and Quebec in 18 
 1782-83 
 p 
 The Beginnings of Democracy 
 Democratic institutions developed gradually and peacefully. The first representative assembly was elected in Halifax, Nova Scotia, in 1758. Prince Edward Island followed in 1773, New Brunswick in 1785. The Constitutional Act of 1791 divided the Province of Quebec into Upper Canada (later Ontario), which was mainly Loyalist, Protestant and English-speaking, and Lower Canada (later Quebec), heavily Catholic and French-speaking. 
 The Act also granted to the Canadas, for the first time, legislative assemblies elected by the people. The name Canada also became official at this time and has been used ever since. 
 The Atlantic colonies and the two Canadas were known collectively as British North America. 
 The first elected Assembly of Lower Canada, in Québec city, debates whether to use both French and English, January 21, 1793 
 p 
 ABOLITION OF SLAVERY 
 Slavery has existed all over the world, from Asia, Africa and the Middle East to the Americas. 
 The first movement to abolish the transatlantic slave trade emerged in the British Parliament in the late 1700s. In 1793, Upper Canada, led by Lieutenant Governor John Graves Simcoe, a Loyalist military officer, became the first province in the Empire to move toward abolition. In 1807, the British Parliament prohibited the buying and selling of slaves, and in 1833 abolished slavery throughout the Empire. Thousands of slaves escaped from the United States, followed 
 “the North Star” and settled in Canada via the Underground Railroad, a Christian anti-slavery network. 
 (From Left to Right) 
 Lieutenant-Colonel John Graves Simcoe was Upper Canada’s first Lieutenant Governor and founder of the City of York (now Toronto). Simcoe also made Upper Canada the first province in the British Empire to abolish slavery Mary Ann Shadd Cary was an outspoken activist in the movement to abolish slavery in the U.S.A. In 1853 she became the first woman publisher in Canada, helping to found and edit The Provincial Freeman, a weekly newspaper 19 
 dedicated to anti-slavery, black immigration to Canada, temperance (urging people to drink less alcohol) and upholding British rule 
 p 
 A GROWING ECONOMY 
 The first companies in Canada were formed during the French and British regimes and competed for the fur trade. The Hudson’s Bay Company, with French, British and Aboriginal employees, came to dominate the trade in the northwest from Fort Garry (Winnipeg) and Fort Edmonton to Fort Langley (near Vancouver) and Fort Victoria—trading posts that later became cities. 
 The first financial institutions opened in the late 18th and early 19th centuries. The Montreal Stock Exchange opened in 1832. For centuries Canada’s economy was based mainly on farming and on exporting natural resources such as fur, fish and timber, transported by roads, lakes, rivers and canals. 
 The War of 1812: The Fight for Canada 
 After the defeat of Napoleon Bonaparte’s fleet in the Battle of Trafalgar (1805), the Royal Navy ruled the waves. The British Empire, which included Canada, fought to resist Bonaparte’s bid to dominate Europe. This led to American resentment at British interference with their shipping. Believing it would be easy to conquer Canada, the United States launched an invasion in June 1812. The Americans were mistaken. Canadian volunteers and First Nations, including Shawnee led by Chief Tecumseh, supported British soldiers in Canada’s defence. In July, Major-General Sir Isaac Brock captured Detroit but was killed while defending against an American attack at Queenston Heights, near Niagara Falls, a battle the Americans lost. In 1813, Lieutenant-Colonel Charles de Salaberry and 460 soldiers, mostly French Canadiens , turned back 4,000 American invaders at Châteauguay, south of Montreal. In 1813 the Americans burned Government House and the Parliament Buildings in York (now Toronto). In retaliation in 1814, Major-General Robert Ross led an expedition from Nova Scotia that burned down the White House and other public buildings in Washington, D.C. Ross died in battle soon afterwards and was buried in Halifax with full military honours. 
 (From Left to Right) 
 HMS Shannon, a Royal Navy frigate, leads the captured USS Chesapeake into Halifax harbour, 1813. There were also naval battles on the Great Lakes 
 Major-General Sir Isaac Brock and Chief Tecumseh. Together, British troops, First Nations and Canadian volunteers defeated an American invasion in 1812–14 
 20 
 French-Canadian militiamen helped defend Canada in the War of 1812 
 p 
 By 1814, the American attempt to conquer Canada had failed. The British paid for a costly Canadian defence system, including the Citadels at Halifax and Québec city, the naval drydock at Halifax and Fort Henry at Kingston—today popular historic sites. The present-day Canada-U.S.A. border is partly an outcome of the War of 1812, which ensured that Canada would remain independent of the United States. 
 The Duke of Wellington sent some of his best soldiers to defend Canada in 1814. He then chose Bytown (Ottawa) as the endpoint of the Rideau Canal, part of a network of forts to prevent the U.S.A. from invading Canada again. 
 Wellington, who defeated Napoleon in 1815, therefore played a direct role in founding the national capital 21 
 In 1813, Laura Secord, pioneer wife and mother of five children, made a dangerous 19-mile (30-km) journey on foot to warn Lieutenant James FitzGibbon of a planned American attack. Her bravery contributed to victory at the Battle of Beaver Dams. She is recognized as a heroine to this day p 
 REBELLIONS OF 1837–38 
 In the 1830s, reformers in Upper and Lower Canada believed that progress toward full democracy was too slow. Some believed Canada should adopt American republican values or even try to join the United States. When armed rebellions occurred in 1837–38 in the area outside Montreal and in Toronto, the rebels did not have enough public support to succeed. 
 They were defeated by British troops and Canadian volunteers. A number of rebels were hanged or exiled; some exiles later returned to Canada. 
 Lord Durham, an English reformer sent to report on the rebellions, recommended that Upper and Lower Canada be merged and given responsible government. This meant that the ministers of the Crown must have the support of a majority of the elected representatives in order to govern. Controversially, Lord Durham also said that the quickest way for the Canadiens to achieve progress was to assimilate into English-speaking Protestant culture. 
 This recommendation demonstrated a complete lack of understanding of French Canadians, who sought to uphold the distinct identity of French Canada. 
 Some reformers, including Sir Étienne-Paschal Taché and Sir George-Étienne Cartier, later became Fathers of Confederation, as did a former member of the voluntary government militia in Upper Canada, Sir John A. Macdonald. 
 RESPONSIBLE GOVERNMENT 
 In 1840, Upper and Lower Canada were united as the Province of Canada. Reformers such as Sir Louis-Hippolyte La Fontaine and Robert Baldwin, in parallel with Joseph Howe in Nova Scotia, worked with British governors toward responsible government. 
 The first British North American colony to attain full responsible government was Nova Scotia in 1847–48. In 1848–49 the governor of United Canada, Lord Elgin, with encouragement from London, introduced responsible government. 
 This is the system that we have today: if the government loses a confidence vote in the 22 
 assembly it must resign. La Fontaine, a champion of democracy and French language rights, became the first leader of a responsible government in the Canadas. 
 CONFEDERATION 
 From 1864 to 1867, representatives of Nova Scotia, New Brunswick and the Province of Canada, with British support, worked together to establish a new country. These men are known as the Fathers of Confederation. They created two levels of government: federal and provincial. The old Province of Canada was split into two new provinces: Ontario and Quebec, which, together with New Brunswick and Nova Scotia, formed the new country called the Dominion of Canada. Each province would elect its own legislature and have control of such areas as education and health. 
 The British Parliament passed the British North America Act in 1867. The Dominion of Canada was officially born on July 1, 1867. Until 1982, July 1 was celebrated as “Dominion Day” to commemorate the day that Canada became a self-governing Dominion. Today it is officially known as Canada Day. 
 Sir Louis-Hippolyte La Fontaine, a champion of French language rights, became the first head of a responsible government (similar to a prime minister) in Canada in 1849 
 p 
 The Fathers of Confederation established the Dominion of Canada on July 1, 1867, the birth of the country that we know today 
 p 
 23 
 Dominion from Sea to Sea 
 Sir Leonard Tilley, an elected official and Father of Confederation from New Brunswick, suggested the term Dominion of Canada in 1864. He was inspired by Psalm 72 in the Bible which refers to “dominion from sea to sea and from the river to the ends of the earth.” This phrase embodied the vision of building a powerful, united, wealthy and free country that spanned a continent. The title was written into the Constitution, was used officially for about 100 years, and remains part of our heritage today. 
 Dominion of Canada $1 bill, 1923, showing King George V, who assigned Canada’s national colours (white and red) in 1921, the colours of our national flag today 
 p 
 Expansion of the Dominion 
 1867 – Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia, 
 New Brunswick | 
 1870 – Manitoba, Northwest Territories | 
 1871 – British Columbia | 
 1873 – Prince Edward Island | 
 1880 – Transfer of the Arctic Islands (to N.W.T.) | 
 1898 – Yukon Territory | 
 1905 – Alberta, Saskatchewan | 
 1949 – Newfoundland and Labrador | 
 1999 – Nunavut | 
 Did you know? In the 1920s, some believed that the British West Indies (British territories in the Caribbean Sea) should become part of Canada. This did not occur, though Canada and Commonwealth Caribbean countries and territories enjoy close ties today. 
 Canada’s First Prime Minister 
 In 1867, Sir John Alexander Macdonald, a Father of Confederation, became Canada’s first Prime Minister. Born in Scotland on January 11, 1815, he came to Upper Canada as a child. 
 He was a lawyer in Kingston, Ontario, a gifted politician and a colourful personality. Parliament has recognized January 11 as Sir John A. Macdonald Day. His portrait is on the $10 bill. 
 Sir George-Étienne Cartier was the key architect of Confederation from Quebec. A railway lawyer, Montrealer, close ally of Macdonald and patriotic Canadien , Cartier led Quebec into Confederation and helped negotiate the entry of the Northwest Territories, Manitoba and British Columbia into Canada. 
 24 
 Sir John A. Macdonald, the first Prime Minister of the Dominion of Canada p 
 CHALLENGE IN THE WEST 
 When Canada took over the vast northwest region from the Hudson’s Bay Company in 1869, the 12,000 Métis of the Red River were not consulted. In response, Louis Riel led an armed uprising and seized Fort Garry, the territorial capital. Canada’s future was in jeopardy. How could the Dominion reach from sea to sea if it could not control the interior? 
 Ottawa sent soldiers to retake Fort Garry in 1870. Riel fled to the United States and Canada established a new province: Manitoba. Riel was elected to Parliament but never took his seat. 
 Later, as Métis and Indian rights were again threatened by westward settlement, a second rebellion in 1885 in present-day Saskatchewan led to Riel’s trial and execution for high treason, a decision that was strongly opposed in Quebec. Riel is seen by many as a hero, a defender of Métis rights and the father of Manitoba. 
 After the first Métis uprising, Prime Minister Macdonald established the North West Mounted Police (NWMP) in 1873 to pacify the West and assist in negotiations with the Indians. The NWMP founded Fort Calgary, Fort MacLeod and other centres that today are cities and towns. 
 Regina became its headquarters. Today, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP or “the Mounties”) are the national police force and one of Canada’s best-known symbols. Some of Canada’s most colourful heroes, such as Major General Sir Sam Steele, came from the ranks of the Mounties. 
 (From Left to Right) 
 Fort Garry, 1863: the flag of the Hudson’s Bay Company flew over Western Canada for 200 years before Confederation 
 25 
 Sir Sam Steele: A great frontier hero, Mounted Policeman and soldier of the Queen Métis Resistance: Gabriel Dumont was the Métis’ greatest military leader p 
 A Railway from Sea to Sea 
 British Columbia joined Canada in 1871 after Ottawa promised to build a railway to the West Coast. On November 7, 1885, a powerful symbol of unity was completed when Donald Smith (Lord Strathcona), the Scottish-born director of the Canadian Pacific Railway (CPR), drove the last spike. The project was financed by British and American investors and built by both European and Chinese labour. Afterwards the Chinese were subject to discrimination, including the Head Tax, a race-based entry fee. The Government of Canada apologized in 2006 for this discriminatory policy. After many years of heroic work, the CPR’s “ribbons of steel” fulfilled a national dream. 
 Members of the train crew pose with a westbound Pacific Express, at the first crossing of the Illecillewaet River near Glacier, B.C., 1886 
 p 
 26 
 Chinese workers’ camp on the CPR, Kamloops, B.C., 1886 
 MOVING WESTWARD 
 Canada’s economy grew and became more industrialized during the economic boom of the 1890s and early 1900s. One million British and one million Americans immigrated to Canada at this time. 
 Sir Wilfrid Laurier became the first French-Canadian prime minister since Confederation and encouraged immigration to the West. His portrait is on the $5 bill. The railway made it possible for immigrants, including 170,000 Ukrainians, 115,000 Poles and tens of thousands from Germany, France, Norway and Sweden to settle in the West before 1914 and develop a thriving agricultural sector. 
 THE FIRST WORLD WAR 
 Most Canadians were proud to be part of the British Empire. Over 7,000 volunteered to fight in the South African War (1899–1902), popularly known as the Boer War, and over 260 died. In 1900, Canadians took part in the battles of Paardeberg (“Horse Mountain”) and Lillefontein, victories that strengthened national pride in Canada. 
 When Germany attacked Belgium and France in 1914 and Britain declared war, Ottawa formed the Canadian Expeditionary Force (later the Canadian Corps). More than 600,000 
 Canadians served in the war, most of them volunteers, out of a total population of eight million. 
 On the battlefield, the Canadians proved to be tough, innovative soldiers. Canada shared in the tragedy and triumph of the Western Front. The Canadian Corps captured Vimy Ridge in April 1917, with 10,000 killed or wounded, securing the Canadians’ reputation for valour as the 
 “shock troops of the British Empire.” One Canadian officer said: “It was Canada from the Atlantic to the Pacific on parade ... In those few minutes I witnessed the birth of a nation.” April 9 is celebrated as Vimy Day. 
 Regrettably, from 1914 to 1920, Ottawa interned over 8,000 former Austro-Hungarian subjects, mainly Ukrainian men, as “enemy aliens” in 24 labour camps across Canada, even though Britain advised against the policy. 
 In 1918, under the command of General Sir Arthur Currie, Canada’s greatest soldier, the 27 
 Canadian Corps advanced alongside the French and British Empire troops in the last hundred days. These included the victorious Battle of Amiens on August 8, 1918–which the Germans called “the black day of the German Army”–followed by Arras, Canal du Nord, Cambrai and Mons. With Germany and Austria’s surrender, the war ended in the Armistice on November 11, 1918. In total 60,000 Canadians were killed and 170,000 wounded. The war strengthened both national and imperial pride, particularly in English Canada. 
 (From Left to Right) 
 Sergeant, Fort Garry Horse, Canadian Expeditionary Force, 1916 
 Sir Arthur Currie, a reserve officer, became Canada’s greatest soldier Maple leaf cap badge from the First World War. Canada’s soldiers began using the maple leaf in the 1850s The Vimy Memorial in France honours those who served and died in the Battle of Vimy Ridge on April 9, 1917, the first British victory of the First World War 
 P 
 WOMEN GET THE VOTE 
 At the time of Confederation, the vote was limited to property-owning adult white males. This 28 
 was common in most democratic countries at the time. The effort by women to achieve the right to vote is known as the women’s suffrage movement. Its founder in Canada was Dr. 
 Emily Stowe, the first Canadian woman to practise medicine in Canada. In 1916, Manitoba became the first province to grant voting rights to women. 
 In 1917, thanks to the leadership of women such as Dr. Stowe and other suffragettes, the federal government of Sir Robert Borden gave women the right to vote in federal elections — 
 first to nurses at the battle front, then to women who were related to men in active wartime service. In 1918, most Canadian female citizens aged 21 and over were granted the right to vote in federal elections. In 1921 Agnes Macphail, a farmer and teacher, became the first woman MP. Due to the work of Thérèse Casgrain and others, Quebec granted women the vote in 1940. 
 More than 3,000 nurses, nicknamed “Bluebirds,” served in the Royal Canadian Army Medical Corps, 2,500 of them overseas 
 p 
 Agnes Macphail, a farmer and teacher, became the first woman MP in 1921 
 p 
 BETWEEN THE WARS 
 After the First World War, the British Empire evolved into a free association of states known as 29 
 the British Commonwealth of Nations. Canada remains a leading member of the Commonwealth to this day, together with other successor states of the Empire such as India, Australia, New Zealand, and several African and Caribbean countries. 
 The “Roaring Twenties” were boom times, with prosperity for businesses and low unemployment. The stock market crash of 1929, however, led to the Great Depression or the 
 “Dirty Thirties.” Unemployment reached 27% in 1933 and many businesses were wiped out. 
 Farmers in Western Canada were hit hardest by low grain prices and a terrible drought. 
 There was growing demand for the government to create a social safety net with minimum wages, a standard work week and programs such as unemployment insurance. The Bank of Canada, a central bank to manage the money supply and bring stability to the financial system, was created in 1934. Immigration dropped and many refugees were turned away, including Jews trying to flee Nazi Germany in 1939. 
 Phil Edwards was a Canadian track and field champion. Born in British Guiana, he won bronze medals for Canada in the 1928, 1932 and 1936 Olympics, then graduated from McGill University Medical School. He served as a captain in the Canadian Army during the Second World War and, as a Montreal doctor, became an expert in tropical diseases P 
 P 
 Canadians remember the sacrifices of our veterans and brave fallen in all wars up to the present day in which Canadians took part, each year on November 11: Remembrance Day. 
 Canadians wear the red poppy and observe a moment of silence at the 11th hour of the 11th day of the 11th month to honour the sacrifices of over a million brave men and women who have served, and the 110,000 who have given their lives. Canadian medical officer Lieutenant-Colonel John McCrae composed the poem “In Flanders Fields” in 1915; it is often recited on Remembrance Day: 
 In Flanders fields the poppies blow 
 Between the crosses, row on row, 
 That mark our place; and in the sky 
 The larks, still bravely singing, fly 
 Scarce heard amid the guns below. 
 We are the dead. Short days ago 
 30 
 We lived, felt dawn, saw sunset glow, 
 Loved, and were loved, and now we lie 
 In Flanders fields. 
 Take up our quarrel with the foe: 
 To you from failing hands we throw 
 The torch; be yours to hold it high. 
 If ye break faith with us who die 
 We shall not sleep, though poppies grow 
 In Flanders fields. 
 (From Left to Right) 
 Canadian soldiers observe Remembrance Day 
 Remembrance Day poppy 
 Canadian war veteran 
 P 
 Scouts with Remembrance Day wreath 
 P 
 The D-Day Invasion, June 6, 1944 
 In order to defeat Nazism and Fascism, the Allies invaded Nazi-occupied Europe. Canadians took part in the liberation of Italy in 1943–44. In the epic invasion of Normandy in northern France on June 6,1944, known as D-Day, 15,000 Canadian troops stormed and captured Juno Beach from the German Army, a great national achievement shown in this painting by Orville Fisher. Approximately one in ten Allied soldiers on D-Day was Canadian. The Canadian Army liberated the Netherlands in 1944–45 and helped force the German surrender of May 8, 1945, bringing to an end six years of war in Europe. 
 31 
 In the Second World War, the Canadians captured Juno Beach as part of the Allied invasion of Normandy on D-Day, June 6, 1944 
 p 
 THE SECOND WORLD WAR 
 The Second World War began in 1939 when Adolf Hitler, the National Socialist (Nazi) dictator of Germany, invaded Poland and conquered much of Europe. Canada joined with its democratic allies in the fight to defeat tyranny by force of arms. 
 More than one million Canadians and Newfoundlanders (Newfoundland was a separate British entity) served in the Second World War, out of a population of 11.5 million. This was a high proportion and of these, 44,000 were killed. 
 The Canadians fought bravely and suffered losses in the unsuccessful defence of Hong Kong (1941) from attack by Imperial Japan, and in a failed raid on Nazi-controlled Dieppe on the coast of France (1942). 
 The Royal Canadian Air Force (RCAF) took part in the Battle of Britain and provided a high proportion of Commonwealth aircrew in bombers and fighter planes over Europe. Moreover, Canada contributed more to the Allied air effort than any other Commonwealth country, with over 130,000 Allied air crew trained in Canada under the British Commonwealth Air Training Plan. 
 The Royal Canadian Navy (RCN) saw its finest hour in the Battle of the Atlantic, protecting convoys of merchant ships against German submarines. Canada’s Merchant Navy helped to feed, clothe and resupply Britain. At the end of the Second World War, Canada had the third-largest navy in the world. 
 In the Pacific war, Japan invaded the Aleutian Islands, attacked a lighthouse on Vancouver Island, launched fire balloons over B.C. and the Prairies, and grossly maltreated Canadian prisoners of war captured at Hong Kong. Japan surrendered on August 14, 1945—the end of four years of war in the Pacific. 
 Regrettably, the state of war and public opinion in B.C. led to the forcible relocation of Canadians of Japanese origin by the federal government and the sale of their property without compensation. This occurred even though the military and the RCMP told Ottawa that they 32 
 posed little danger to Canada. The Government of Canada apologized in 1988 for wartime wrongs and compensated the victims. 
 33 
 Modern Canada 
 TRADE AND ECONOMIC GROWTH 
 Postwar Canada enjoyed record prosperity and material progress. The world’s restrictive trading policies in the Depression era were opened up by such treaties as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), now the World Trade Organization (WTO). The discovery of oil in Alberta in 1947 began Canada’s modern energy industry. In 1951, for the first time, a majority of Canadians were able to afford adequate food, shelter and clothing. 
 Between 1945 and 1970, as Canada drew closer to the United States and other trading partners, the country enjoyed one of the strongest economies among industrialized nations. 
 Today, Canadians enjoy one of the world’s highest standards of living—maintained by the hard work of Canadians and by trade with other nations, in particular the United States. 
 As prosperity grew, so did the ability to support social assistance programs. The Canada Health Act ensures common elements and a basic standard of coverage. Unemployment insurance (now called “employment insurance”) was introduced by the federal government in 1940. Old Age Security was devised as early as 1927, and the Canada and Quebec Pension Plans in 1965. Publicly funded education is provided by the provinces and territories. 
 A medical researcher 
 p 
 INTERNATIONAL ENGAGEMENT 
 Like Australia, New Zealand and other countries, Canada developed its autonomy gradually with a capacity to make significant contributions internationally. 
 The Cold War began when several liberated countries of eastern Europe became part of a Communist bloc controlled by the Soviet Union under the dictator Josef Stalin. Canada joined with other democratic countries of the West to form the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), a military alliance, and with the United States in the North American Aerospace Defence Command (NORAD). 
 Canada joined international organizations such as the United Nations (UN). It participated in the UN operation defending South Korea in the Korean War (1950–53), with 500 dead and 1,000 wounded. Canada has taken part in numerous UN peacekeeping missions in places as varied as Egypt, Cyprus and Haiti, as well as in other international security operations such as those in the former Yugoslavia and Afghanistan. 
 34 
 Toronto’s business district: Canada’s financial capital CANADA AND QUEBEC 
 French-Canadian society and culture flourished in the postwar years. Quebec experienced an era of rapid change in the 1960s known as the Quiet Revolution. Many Quebecers sought to separate from Canada. In 1963 Parliament established the Royal Commission on Bilingualism and Biculturalism. This led to the Official Languages Act (1969), which guarantees French and English services in the federal government across Canada. In 1970, Canada helped found La Francophonie , an international association of French-speaking countries. 
 The movement for Quebec sovereignty gained strength but was defeated in a referendum in the province in 1980. After much negotiation, in 1982 the Constitution was amended without the agreement of Quebec. Though sovereignty was again defeated in a second referendum in 1995, the autonomy of Quebec within Canada remains a lively topic—part of the dynamic that continues to shape our country. 
 A CHANGING SOCIETY 
 As social values changed over more than 50 years, Canada became a more flexible and open society. Many took advantage of expanding secondary and postsecondary educational opportunities and a growing number of women entered the professional work force. 
 Most Canadians of Asian descent had in the past been denied the vote in federal and provincial elections. In 1948 the last of these, the Japanese-Canadians, gained the right to vote. Aboriginal people were granted the vote in 1960. Today every citizen over the age of 18 
 may vote. 
 Canada welcomed thousands of refugees from Communist oppression, including about 37,000 
 who escaped Soviet tyranny in Hungary in 1956. With the Communist victory in the Vietnam War in 1975, many Vietnamese fled, including over 50,000 who sought refuge in Canada. 
 The idea of multiculturalism, as a result of 19th- and 20th-century immigration, gained a new impetus. By the 1960s, one-third of Canadians had origins that were neither British nor French, and took pride in preserving their distinct culture in the Canadian fabric. Today, diversity enriches Canadians’ lives, particularly in our cities. 
 35 
 (From Left to Right) 
 Vietnamese Canadian parade 
 F-86 Sabre, Royal Canadian Air Force 
 Cirque du Soleil 
 p 
 ARTS AND CULTURE IN CANADA 
 Canadian artists have a long history of achievement in which Canadians take pride. Artists from all regions reflect and define our culture and forms of creative expression and have achieved greatness both at home and abroad. 
 Canadians have made significant contributions to literature in English and in French. Novelists, poets, historians, educators and musicians had a significant cultural impact. Men and women of letters included Stephen Leacock, Louis Hémon, Sir Charles G.D. Roberts, Pauline Johnson, Émile Nelligan, Robertson Davies, Margaret Laurence and Mordecai Richler. 
 Musicians such as Sir Ernest MacMillan and Healey Willan won renown in Canada and abroad. Writers such as Joy Kogawa, Michael Ondaatje and Rohinton Mistry have diversified Canada’s literary experience. 
 In the visual arts, Canada is historically perhaps best known for the Group of Seven, founded in 1920, who developed a style of painting to capture the rugged wilderness landscapes. Emily Carr painted the forests and Aboriginal artifacts of the West Coast. Les Automatistes of Quebec were pioneers of modern abstract art in the 1950s, most notably Jean-Paul Riopelle. 
 Quebec’s Louis-Philippe Hébert was a celebrated sculptor of historical figures. Kenojuak Ashevak pioneered modern Inuit art with etchings, prints and soapstone sculptures. 
 Canada has a long and respected performing arts history, with a network of regional theatres and world-renowned performing arts companies. 
 The films of Denys Arcand have been popular in Quebec and across the country, and have won international awards. Other noteworthy Canadian filmmakers include Norman Jewison and Atom Egoyan. Canadian television has had a popular following. 
 36 
 The Jack Pine, Tom Thomson 
 p 
 Sports have flourished as all provinces and territories have produced amateur and professional star athletes and Olympic medal winners. Basketball was invented by Canadian James Naismith in 1891. Many major league sports boast Canadian talent and in the national sport of ice hockey, Canadian teams have dominated the world. In 1996 at the Olympic Summer Games, Donovan Bailey became a world record sprinter and double Olympic gold medallist. Chantal Petitclerc became a world champion wheelchair racer and Paralympic gold medalist. One of the greatest hockey players of all time, Wayne Gretzky, played for the Edmonton Oilers from 1979 to 1988. 
 In 1980, Terry Fox, a British Columbian who lost his right leg to cancer at the age of 18, began a cross-country run, the “Marathon of Hope,” to raise money for cancer research. He became a hero to Canadians. While he did not finish the run and ultimately lost his battle with cancer, his legacy continues through yearly fundraising events in his name. In 1985, fellow British Columbian Rick Hansen circled the globe in a wheelchair to raise funds for spinal cord research. 
 Canadian advances in science and technology are world renowned and have changed the way the world communicates and does business. Marshall McLuhan and Harold Innis were pioneer thinkers. Science and research in Canada have won international recognition and attracted world-class students, academics and entrepreneurs engaged in medical research, telecommunications and other fields. Since 1989, the Canadian Space Agency and Canadian astronauts have participated in space exploration, often using the Canadian-designed and built Canadarm. Gerhard Herzberg, a refugee from Nazi Germany, John Polanyi, Sidney Altman, Richard E. Taylor, Michael Smith and Bertram Brockhouse were Nobel Prize-winning scientists. 
 The prosperity and diversity of our country depend on all Canadians working together to face challenges of the future. In seeking to become a citizen, you are joining a country that, with your active participation, will continue to grow and thrive. 
 How will you make your contribution to Canada? 
 37 
 (From Left to Right) 
 Donovan Bailey 
 Chantal Petitclerc 
 Terry Fox 
 Wayne Gretzky 
 (From Left to Right) 
 Mark Tewksbury, Olympic gold medallist and prominent activist for gay and lesbian Canadians In 1972, Paul Henderson scored the winning goal for Canada in the Canada-Soviet Summit Series. This goal is often referred to as “the goal heard around the world” and is still remembered today as an important event in both sports and cultural history 
 Catriona Le May Doan carries the flag after winning a gold medal in speed skating at the 2002 Olympic Winter Games Canadian football is a popular game that differs in a number of ways from American football. Professional teams in the Canadian Football League (CFL) compete for the championship Grey Cup, donated by Lord Grey, the Governor General, in 1909 
 p 
 GREAT CANADIAN DISCOVERIES AND INVENTIONS 
 Canadians have made various discoveries and inventions. Some of the most famous are listed below. 
 Alexander Graham Bell — hit on the idea of the telephone at his summer house in Canada. 
 Joseph-Armand Bombardier — invented the snowmobile, a light-weight winter vehicle. 
 Sir Sandford Fleming — invented the worldwide system of standard time zones. 
 Matthew Evans and Henry Woodward —together invented the first electric light bulb and later sold the patent to Thomas Edison who, more famously, commercialized the light bulb. 
 Reginald Fessenden — contributed to the invention of radio, sending the first wireless voice message in the world. 
 38 
 Dr. Wilder Penfield — was a pioneering brain surgeon at McGill University in Montreal, and was known as “the greatest living Canadian.” 
 Dr. John A. Hopps — invented the first cardiac pacemaker, used today to save the lives of people with heart disorders. 
 SPAR Aerospace / National Research Council — invented the Canadarm, a robotic arm used in outer space. 
 Mike Lazaridis and Jim Balsillie — co-CEOs of Research in Motion (RIM) — a wireless communications company known for its most famous invention–the BlackBerry. 
 Sir Frederick Banting of Toronto and Charles Best discovered insulin, a hormone to treat diabetes that has saved 16 
 million lives worldwide 
 Want to learn more about Canada’s history? Visit a museum or national historic site! Through artifacts, works of art, stories, images and documents, museums explore the diverse events and accomplishments that formed Canada’s history. Museums can be found in almost every city and town across Canada. National historic sites are located in all provinces and territories and include such diverse places as battlefields, archaeological sites, buildings and sacred spaces. To find a museum or national historic site in your community or region, visit the websites of the Virtual Museum of Canada and Parks Canada listed at the end of this guide. 
 39 
 How Canadians Govern 
 Themselves 
 There are three key facts about Canada’s system of government: our country is a federal state, a parliamentary democracy and a constitutional monarchy. 
 (From Left to Right) 
 Queen Elizabeth II opening the 23rd Parliament (1957) 
 Parliament Hill, Ottawa 
 p 
 FEDERAL STATE 
 There are federal, provincial, territorial and municipal governments in Canada. The responsibilities of the federal and provincial governments were defined in 1867 in the British North America Act , now known as the Constitution Act , 1867. 
 In our federal state , the federal government takes responsibility for matters of national and international concern. These include defence, foreign policy, interprovincial trade and communications, currency, navigation, criminal law and citizenship. The provinces are responsible for municipal government, education, health, natural resources, property and civil rights, and highways. The federal government and the provinces share jurisdiction over agriculture and immigration. Federalism allows different provinces to adopt policies tailored to their own populations, and gives provinces the flexibility to experiment with new ideas and policies. 
 Every province has its own elected Legislative Assembly, like the House of Commons in Ottawa. The three northern territories, which have small populations, do not have the status of provinces, but their governments and assemblies carry out many of the same functions. 
 PARLIAMENTARY DEMOCRACY 
 In Canada’s parliamentary democracy , the people elect members to the House of Commons in Ottawa and to the provincial and territorial legislatures. These representatives are responsible for passing laws, approving and monitoring expenditures, and keeping the government accountable. Cabinet ministers are responsible to the elected representatives, which means they must retain the “confidence of the House” and have to resign if they are defeated in a 40 
 non-confidence vote. 
 Parliament has three parts: the Sovereign (Queen or King), the Senate and the House of Commons. Provincial legislatures comprise the Lieutenant Governor and the elected Assembly. 
 In the federal government, the Prime Minister selects the Cabinet ministers and is responsible for the operations and policy of the government. The House of Commons is the representative chamber, made up of members of Parliament elected by the people, traditionally every four years. Senators are appointed by the Governor General on the advice of the Prime Minister and serve until age 75. Both the House of Commons and the Senate consider and review bills (proposals for new laws). No bill can become law in Canada until it has been passed by both chambers and has received royal assent, granted by the Governor General on behalf of the Sovereign. 
 David Johnston, 28th Governor General since Confederation, with grandchildren p 
 MAKING LAWS 
 HOW A BILL BECOMES LAW — THE LEGISLATIVE PROCESS 
 STEP 1 First Reading – The bill is considered read for the first time and is printed. 
 STEP 2 Second Reading – Members debate the bill’s principle. 
 STEP 3 Committee Stage – Committee members study the bill clause by clause. 
 STEP 4 Report Stage – Members can make other amendments. 
 STEP 5 Third Reading – Members debate and vote on the bill. 
 41 
 STEP 6 Senate – The bill follows a similar process in the Senate. 
 STEP 7 Royal Assent – The bill receives royal assent after being passed by both Houses. 
 p 
 Living in a democracy, Canadian citizens have the right and the responsibility to participate in making decisions that affect them. It is important for Canadians aged 18 or more to participate in their democracy by voting in federal, provincial or territorial and municipal elections. 
 CONSTITUTIONAL MONARCHY 
 As a constitutional monarchy , Canada’s Head of State is a hereditary Sovereign (Queen or King), who reigns in accordance with the Constitution: the rule of law. The Sovereign is a part of Parliament, playing an important, non-partisan role as the focus of citizenship and allegiance, most visibly during royal visits to Canada. Her Majesty is a symbol of Canadian sovereignty, a guardian of constitutional freedoms, and a reflection of our history. The Royal Family’s example of lifelong service to the community is an encouragement for citizens to give their best to their country. As Head of the Commonwealth, the Sovereign links Canada to 53 
 other nations that cooperate to advance social, economic and cultural progress. Other constitutional monarchies include Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Australia, New Zealand, The Netherlands, Spain, Thailand, Japan, Jordan and Morocco. 
 There is a clear distinction in Canada between the head of state—the Sovereign—and the head of government—the Prime Minister, who actually directs the governing of the country. 
 The Sovereign is represented in Canada by the Governor General, who is appointed by the Sovereign on the advice of the Prime Minister, usually for five years. In each of the ten provinces, the Sovereign is represented by the Lieutenant Governor, who is appointed by the Governor General on the advice of the Prime Minister, also normally for five years. 
 The interplay between the three branches of government—the Executive, Legislative and Judicial—which work together but also sometimes in creative tension, helps to secure the rights and freedoms of Canadians. 
 Each provincial and territorial government has an elected legislature where provincial and territorial laws are passed. The members of the legislature are called members of the Legislative Assembly (MLAs), members of the National Assembly (MNAs), members of the Provincial Parliament (MPPs) or members of the House of Assembly (MHAs), depending on the province or territory. 
 In each province, the Premier has a role similar to that of the Prime Minister in the federal government, just as the Lieutenant Governor has a role similar to that of the Governor General. In the three territories, the Commissioner represents the federal government and plays a ceremonial role. 
 CANADA’S SYSTEM OF GOVERNMENT 
 42 
 43 
 Federal Elections 
 Canadians vote in elections for the people they want to represent them in the House of Commons. In each election, voters may re-elect the same members of the House of Commons or choose new ones. Members of the House of Commons are also known as members of Parliament or MPs. 
 House of Commons chamber 
 p 
 Under legislation passed by Parliament, federal elections must be held on the third Monday in October every four years following the most recent general election. The Prime Minister may ask the Governor General to call an earlier election. 
 Canada is divided into 308 electoral districts, also known as ridings or constituencies. An electoral district is a geographical area represented by a member of Parliament (MP). The citizens in each electoral district elect one MP who sits in the House of Commons to represent them, as well as all Canadians. 
 Canadian citizens who are 18 years old or older may run in a federal election. The people who run for office are called candidates. There can be many candidates in an electoral district. 
 The people in each electoral district vote for the candidate and political party of their choice. 
 The candidate who receives the most votes becomes the MP for that electoral district. 
 VOTING 
 One of the privileges of Canadian citizenship is the right to vote. You are eligible to vote in a federal election or cast a ballot in a federal referendum if you are: a Canadian citizen; and 
 at least 18 years old on voting day; and 
 on the voters’ list. 
 44 
 The voters’ lists used during federal elections and referendums are produced from the National Register of Electors by a neutral agency of Parliament called Elections Canada. This is a permanent database of Canadian citizens 18 years of age or older who are qualified to vote in federal elections and referendums. 
 Once an election has been called, Elections Canada mails a voter information card to each elector whose name is in the National Register of Electors. The card lists when and where you vote and the number to call if you require an interpreter or other special services. 
 Even if you choose not to be listed in the National Register of Electors or do not receive a voter information card, you can still be added to the voters’ list at any time, including on election day. 
 To vote either on election day or at advance polls, go to the polling station listed on your voter information card. (See voting procedures) 
 SECRET BALLOT 
 Canadian law secures the right to a secret ballot. This means that no one can watch you vote and no one should look at how you voted. You may choose to discuss how you voted with others, but no one, including family members, your employer or union representative, has the right to insist that you tell them how you voted. Immediately after the polling stations close, election officers count the ballots and the results are announced on radio and television, and in the newspapers. 
 AFTER AN ELECTION 
 Ordinarily, after an election, the leader of the political party with the most seats in the House of Commons is invited by the Governor General to form the government. After being appointed by the Governor General, the leader of this party becomes the Prime Minister. If the party in power holds at least half of the seats in the House of Commons, this is called a majority government . If the party in power holds less than half of the seats in the House of Commons, this is called a minority government . 
 The Prime Minister and the party in power run the government as long as they have the support or confidence of the majority of the MPs. When the House of Commons votes on a major issue such as the budget this is considered a matter of confidence. If a majority of the members of the House of Commons vote against a major government decision, the party in power is defeated, which usually results in the Prime Minister asking the Governor General, on behalf of the Sovereign, to call an election. 
 The Prime Minister chooses the ministers of the Crown, most of them from among members of the House of Commons. Cabinet ministers are responsible for running the federal government departments. The Prime Minister and the Cabinet ministers are called the Cabinet and they make important decisions about how the country is governed. They prepare the budget and propose most new laws. Their decisions can be questioned by all members of the House of Commons. 
 The opposition party with the most members of the House of Commons is the Official Opposition or Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. The other parties that are not in power are known as opposition parties. The role of opposition parties is to peacefully oppose or try to 45 
 improve government proposals. There are four major political parties currently represented in the House of Commons: the Bloc Québécois, Conservative Party, Liberal Party and New Democratic Party. 
 House of Commons in session 
 P 
 VOTING PROCEDURES DURING AN ELECTION PERIOD 
 1. Voter information card 
 Electors whose information is in the National Register of Electors will receive a voter information card. This confirms that your name is on the voters’ list and states when and where you vote. 
 2. I did not get a card 
 If you do not receive a voter information card, call your local elections office to ensure that you are on the voters’ list. If you do not have the number, call Elections Canada, in Ottawa, at 1800-463-6868. 
 3. Advance poll and special ballot 
 If you cannot or do not wish to vote on election day, you can vote at the advance polls or by special ballot. The dates and location are on your voter information card. 
 4. On election day 
 Go to your polling station. The location is on your voter information card. Bring this card and proof of your identity and address to the polling station. 
 5. Marking the ballot 
 46 
 Mark an “X” in the circle next to the name of the candidate of your choice. 
 6. Voting is secret 
 Your vote is secret. You will be invited to go behind the screen to mark your ballot. Once marked, fold it and present it to the poll officials. 
 7. The ballot box 
 The poll official will tear off the ballot number and give your ballot back to you to deposit in the ballot box. 
 8. The election results 
 When the polls close, every ballot is counted and the results are made public. You can see the results on television or on the Elections Canada website (www.elections.ca). 
 Provincial Assembly Charlottetown, P.E.I. 
 p 
 OTHER LEVELS OF GOVERNMENT IN CANADA 
 Local or municipal government plays an important role in the lives of our citizens. Municipal governments usually have a council that passes laws called “by-laws” that affect only the local community. The council usually includes a mayor (or a reeve) and councillors or aldermen. 
 Municipalities are normally responsible for urban or regional planning, streets and roads, sanitation (such as garbage removal), snow removal, firefighting, ambulance and other emergency services, recreation facilities, public transit and some local health and social services. Most major urban centres have municipal police forces. 
 Provincial, territorial and municipal elections are held by secret ballot, but the rules are not the same as those for federal elections. It is important to find out the rules for voting in provincial, territorial and local elections so that you can exercise your right to vote. 
 Government 
 Elected Officials 
 Some Responsibilities 
 International 
 Trade 
 National 
 Aboriginal 
 Defence 
 Affairs 
 Foreign Policy 
 Members of Parliament 
 Immigration 
 47 
 (MPs) 
 Policing 
 (shared) 
 Criminal 
 Agriculture 
 Justice 
 (shared) 
 Environment 
 (shared) 
 Property 
 Members of the Legislative 
 Education 
 and 
 Assembly (MLAs) or 
 Health Care 
 Civil Rights 
 Members of the National 
 Natural 
 Immigration 
 Provincial and 
 Assembly (MNAs) or 
 Resources 
 (shared) 
 Territorial 
 Members of the Provincial 
 Highways 
 Agriculture 
 Parliament (MPPs) or 
 Policing 
 (shared) 
 Members of the House of 
 (Ontario, 
 Environment 
 Assembly (MHAs) 
 Quebec) 
 (shared) 
 Social and Community Health 
 Recycling Programs 
 Transportation and Utilities 
 Municipal 
 Mayor or Reeve 
 (local) 
 Snow Removal 
 Councillors or Aldermen 
 Policing 
 Firefighting 
 Emergency Services 
 The First Nations have band chiefs and councillors who have major responsibilities on First Nations reserves, including housing, schools and other services. There are a number of provincial, regional and national Aboriginal organizations that are a voice for First Nations, Métis and Inuit people in their relationships with the federal, provincial and territorial governments. 
 HOW MUCH DO YOU KNOW ABOUT YOUR GOVERNMENT? 
 Use these pages to take notes and to study important information. 
 Federal Government 
 Head of State: 
 The name of the representative of the 
 48 
 The name of the representative of the 
 Queen of Canada, the Governor General, is 
 The Head of Government, the Prime Minister, is 
 The name of the political party in power is 
 The name of the Leader of the Opposition is 
 The name of the party representing Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition is The names of the other opposition parties and leaders are My Member of Parliament (MP) in Ottawa is 
 My federal electoral district is called 
 Provincial Government 
 The representative of the Queen in 
 my province, the Lieutenant Governor, is 
 The Head of Government (the Premier) is 
 The name of the provincial party in power is 
 The names of the provincial opposition parties and leaders are My provincial representative is 
 Territorial Government 
 The name of the Commissioner, 
 who represents the federal government in my territory, is The name of the Premier is 
 The name of my territorial representative is 
 Municipal Government 
 The name of the municipality where I live is 
 The name of the head of the municipal government (mayor or reeve) is 49 
 Québec City Hall, constructed 1895–96 
 p 
 50 
 The Justice System 
 The Canadian justice system guarantees everyone due process under the law. Our judicial system is founded on the presumption of innocence in criminal matters, meaning everyone is innocent until proven guilty. 
 Canada’s legal system is based on a heritage that includes the rule of law, freedom under the law, democratic principles and due process. Due process is the principle that the government must respect all the legal rights a person is entitled to under the law. 
 Scales of Justice, Vancouver Law Courts. The blindfolded Lady Justice symbolizes the impartial manner in which our laws are administered: blind to all considerations but the facts P 
 Canada is governed by an organized system of laws. These laws are the written rules intended to guide people in our society. They are made by elected representatives. The courts settle disputes and the police enforce the laws. The law in Canada applies to everyone, including judges, politicians and the police. Our laws are intended to provide order in society and a peaceful way to settle disputes, and to express the values and beliefs of Canadians. 
 51 
 Border guard with sniffer dog inspects the trunk of a car at the Canada-U.S.A. border p 
 COURTS 
 The Supreme Court of Canada is our country’s highest court. The Federal Court of Canada deals with matters concerning the federal government. In most provinces there is an appeal court and a trial court, sometimes called the Court of Queen’s Bench or the Supreme Court. 
 There are also provincial courts for lesser offences, family courts, traffic courts and small claims courts for civil cases involving small sums of money. 
 POLICE 
 The police are there to keep people safe and to enforce the law. You can ask the police for help in all kinds of situations—if there’s been an accident, if someone has stolen something from you, if you are a victim of assault, if you see a crime taking place or if someone you know has gone missing. 
 There are different types of police in Canada. There are provincial police forces in Ontario and Quebec and municipal police departments in all provinces. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) enforce federal laws throughout Canada, and serve as the provincial police in all provinces and territories except Ontario and Quebec, as well as in some municipalities. 
 Remember, the police are there to help you. 
 You can also question the police about their service or conduct if you feel you need to. Almost all police forces in Canada have a process by which you can bring your concerns to the police and seek action. 
 GETTING LEGAL HELP 
 Lawyers can help you with legal problems and act for you in court. If you cannot pay for a lawyer, in most communities there are legal aid services available free of charge or at a low cost. 
 52 
 (From Left to Right) 
 Jury benches 
 Ottawa police constable helping a young boy at the Aboriginal Day Flotilla Prisons have an essential role in punishing criminals and deterring crime p 
 53 
 Canadian Symbols 
 Canada has many important symbols — objects, events, and people that have special meaning. Together they help explain what it means to be Canadian and express our national identity. Important Canadian symbols appear throughout this booklet. 
 (From Left to Right) 
 Mace of the House of Commons, Ottawa 
 Canadian flag of 1965 
 The Royal Arms of Canada 
 Parliament at dusk 
 p 
 THE CANADIAN CROWN 
 The Crown has been a symbol of the state in Canada for 400 years. Canada has been a constitutional monarchy in its own right since Confederation in 1867 during Queen Victoria’s reign. Queen Elizabeth II, who has been Queen of Canada since 1952, marked her Golden Jubilee in 2002, and celebrates her Diamond Jubilee (60 years as Sovereign) in 2012. The Crown is a symbol of government, including Parliament, the legislatures, the courts, police services and the Canadian Forces. 
 FLAGS IN CANADA 
 A new Canadian flag was raised for the first time in 1965. The red-white-red pattern comes from the flag of the Royal Military College, Kingston, founded in 1876. Red and white had been colours of France and England since the Middle Ages and the national colours of Canada since 1921. The Union Jack is our official Royal Flag. The Canadian Red Ensign served as the Canadian flag for about 100 years. The provinces and territories also have flags that embody their distinct traditions. 
 THE MAPLE LEAF 
 The maple leaf is Canada’s best-known symbol. Maple leaves were adopted as a symbol by French Canadians in the 1700s, have appeared on Canadian uniforms and insignia since the 1850s, and are carved into the headstones of our fallen soldiers buried overseas and in Canada. 
 THE FLEUR-DE-LYS 
 It is said that the lily flower (“fleur-de-lys”) was adopted by the French king in the year 496. It became the symbol of French royalty for more than 
 1,000 years, including the colony of New France. Revived at Confederation, the fleur-de-lys 54 
 was included in the Canadian Red Ensign. In 1948 Quebec adopted its own flag, based on the Cross and the fleur-de-lys. 
 COAT OF ARMS AND MOTTO 
 As an expression of national pride after the First World War, Canada adopted an official coat of arms and a national motto, A Mari Usque Ad Mare , which in Latin means “from sea to sea.” 
 The arms contain symbols of England, France, Scotland and Ireland as well as red maple leaves. Today the arms can be seen on dollar bills, government documents and public buildings. 
 PARLIAMENT BUILDINGS 
 The towers, arches, sculptures and stained glass of the Parliament Buildings embody the French, English and Aboriginal traditions and the Gothic Revival architecture popular in the time of Queen Victoria. The buildings were completed in the 1860s. The Centre Block was destroyed by an accidental fire in 1916 and rebuilt in 1922. The Library is the only part of the original building remaining. The Peace Tower was completed in 1927 in memory of the First World War. The Memorial Chamber within the Tower contains the Books of Remembrance in which are written the names of soldiers, sailors and airmen who died serving Canada in wars or while on duty. 
 The provincial legislatures are architectural treasures. The Quebec National Assembly is built in the French Second Empire style, while the legislatures of the other provinces are Baroque, Romanesque and neoclassical, reflecting the Greco-Roman heritage of Western civilization in which democracy originated. 
 POPULAR SPORTS 
 Hockey is Canada’s most popular spectator sport and is considered to be the national winter sport. Ice hockey was developed in Canada in the 1800s. The National Hockey League plays for the championship Stanley Cup, donated by Lord Stanley, the Governor General, in 1892. 
 The Clarkson Cup, established in 2005 by Adrienne Clarkson, the 26th Governor General (and the first of Asian origin), is awarded for women’s hockey. Many young Canadians play hockey at school, in a hockey league or on quiet streets—road hockey or street hockey—and are taken to the hockey rink by their parents. Canadian children have collected hockey cards for generations. 
 Canadian football is the second most popular sport. Curling, an ice game introduced by Scottish pioneers, is popular. Lacrosse, an ancient sport first played by Aboriginals, is the official summer sport. Soccer has the most registered players of any game in Canada. 
 THE BEAVER 
 The beaver was adopted centuries ago as a symbol of the Hudson’s Bay Company. It became an emblem of the St. Jean Baptiste Society, a French-Canadian patriotic association, in 1834, and was also adopted by other groups. This industrious rodent can be seen on the five-cent coin, on the coats of arms of Saskatchewan and Alberta, and of cities such as Montreal and Toronto. 
 55 
 CANADA’S OFFICIAL LANGUAGES 
 English and French are the two official languages and are important symbols of identity. 
 English speakers (Anglophones) and French speakers (Francophones) have lived together in partnership and creative tension for more than 300 years. You must have adequate knowledge of English or French to become a Canadian citizen. Adult applicants 55 years of age or over are exempted from this requirement. 
 Parliament passed the Official Languages Act in 1969. It has three main objectives: Establish equality between French and English in Parliament, the Government of Canada and institutions subject to the Act; 
 Maintain and develop official language minority communities in Canada; and Promote equality of French and English in Canadian society. 
 (From left to right) 
 RCMP Musical Ride, Ottawa, Ontario 
 The industrious beaver 
 The Snowbirds (431 Air Demonstration Squadron) are a Canadian icon The Canadian Red Ensign served as the national flag for 100 years, and has been carried officially by veterans since 2005 
 p 
 Montreal Canadiens Stanley Cup champions, 1978 
 p 
 NATIONAL ANTHEM 
 O Canada was proclaimed as the national anthem in 1980. It was first sung in Québec City in 1880. French and English Canadians sing different words to the national anthem. 
 O Canada 
 56 
 O Canada! Our home and native land! 
 True patriot love in all thy sons command 
 With glowing hearts we see thee rise 
 The true North strong and free! 
 From far and wide, O Canada 
 We stand on guard for thee 
 God keep our land glorious and free! 
 O Canada, we stand on guard for thee 
 O Canada, we stand on guard for thee 
 Ô Canada 
 Ô Canada! Terre de nos aïeux, 
 Ton front est ceint de fleurons glorieux! 
 Car ton bras sait porter l’épée, 
 Il sait porter la croix! 
 Ton histoire est une épopée 
 Des plus brillants exploits. 
 Et ta valeur, de foi trempée, 
 Protégera nos foyers et nos droits. 
 Protégera nos foyers et nos droits. 
 ROYAL ANTHEM 
 The Royal Anthem of Canada, “God Save the Queen (or King),” can be played or sung on any occasion when Canadians wish to honour the Sovereign. 
 God Save the Queen 
 God save our gracious Queen! 
 Long live our noble Queen! 
 God save the Queen! 
 Send her victorious, 
 Happy and glorious, 
 Long to reign over us, 
 God save the Queen! 
 Dieu protège la Reine 
 Dieu protège la Reine! 
 De sa main souveraine! 
 Vive la Reine! 
 Qu’un règne glorieux, 
 Long et victorieux, 
 Rende son peuple heureux, 
 Vive la Reine! 
 THE ORDER OF CANADA AND OTHER HONOURS 
 57 
 All countries have ways to recognize outstanding citizens. Official awards are called honours, consisting of orders, decorations and medals . After using British honours for many years, Canada started its own honours system with the Order of Canada in 1967, the centennial of Confederation. 
 If you know of fellow citizens who you think are worthy of recognition, you are welcome to nominate them. Information on nominations for many of these honours can be found at www.gg.ca/document.aspx?id=70?&lan=eng. 
 Jazz pianist Oscar Peterson (left) receives the Order of Canada from Roland Michener (right), the 20th Governor General, in 1973. In the centre are Norah Michener and a portrait of Vincent Massey, the 18th Governor General THE VICTORIA CROSS 
 The Victoria Cross (V.C.) is the highest honour available to Canadians and is awarded for the most conspicuous bravery, a daring or pre-eminent act of valour or self-sacrifice, or extreme devotion to duty in the presence of the enemy. The V.C. has been awarded to 96 Canadians since 1854, including: 
 Then Lieutenant Alexander Roberts Dunn, born in present-day Toronto, served in the British Army in the Charge of the Light Brigade at Balaclava (1854) in the Crimean War, and was the first Canadian to be awarded the Victoria Cross. 
 Able Seaman William Hall of Horton, Nova Scotia, whose parents were American slaves, was the first black man to be awarded the V.C. for his role in the Siege of Lucknow during the Indian Rebellion of 1857. 
 Corporal Filip Konowal, born in Ukraine, showed exceptional courage in the Battle of Hill 70 in 1917, and became the first member of the Canadian Corps not born in the British Empire to be awarded the V.C. 
 Flying ace Captain Billy Bishop, born in Owen Sound, Ontario, earned the V.C. in the Royal Flying Corps during the First World War, and was later an honorary Air Marshal of the Royal Canadian Air Force. 
 Captain Paul Triquet of Cabano, Quebec, earned the V.C. leading his men and a handful of tanks in the attack on Casa Berardi in Italy in 1943 during the Second World War, and was later a Brigadier. 
 Lieutenant Robert Hampton Gray, a navy pilot born in Trail, B.C., was killed while bombing and sinking a Japanese warship in August 1945, a few days before the end of 58 
 the Second World War, and was the last Canadian to receive the V.C. to date. 
 (From Left to Right Top to bottom) 
 Air Marshal William A. Bishop, better known as flying ace Billy Bishop, V.C. 
 Lieutenant Robert Hampton Gray, V.C 
 Filip Konowal, V.C., 
 was promoted Sergeant 
 Colonel Alexander Roberts Dunn, V.C. 
 Able Seaman William Hall, V.C. 
 Brigadier Paul Triquet, V.C. 
 NATIONAL PUBLIC HOLIDAYS AND OTHER IMPORTANT DATES 
 New Year’s Day 
 January 1 
 Sir John A. Macdonald Day 
 January 11 
 Good Friday 
 Friday immediately preceding Easter Sunday 
 Easter Monday 
 Monday immediately following Easter Sunday 
 Vimy Day 
 April 9 
 Victoria Day 
 Monday preceding May 25 (Sovereign’s birthday) 
 Fête Nationale (Quebec) 
 June 24 (Feast of St. John the Baptist) 
 Canada Day 
 July 1 
 Labour Day 
 First Monday of September 
 Thanksgiving Day 
 Second Monday of October 
 59 
 Remembrance Day 
 November 11 
 Sir Wilfrid Laurier Day 
 November 20 
 Christmas 
 December 25 
 Boxing Day 
 December 26 
 60 
 Canada’s Economy 
 A TRADING NATION 
 Canada has always been a trading nation and commerce remains the engine of economic growth. As Canadians, we could not maintain our standard of living without engaging in trade with other nations. 
 In 1988, Canada enacted free trade with the United States. Mexico became a partner in 1994 
 in the broader North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), with over 444 million people and over $1 trillion in merchandise trade in 2008. 
 Today, Canada has one of the ten largest economies in the world and is part of the G8 group of leading industrialized countries with the United States, Germany, the United Kingdom, Italy, France, Japan and Russia. 
 (From Left to Right) 
 Lumber truck 
 Oil pump jacks in southern Alberta 
 Atlantic lobster 
 Hydro-electric dam on the Saguenay River, Quebec 
 CANADA’S ECONOMY INCLUDES THREE MAIN TYPES OF INDUSTRIES: Service industries provide thousands of different jobs in areas like transportation, education, health care, construction, banking, communications, retail services, tourism and government. More than 75% of working Canadians now have jobs in service industries. 
 Manufacturing industries make products to sell in Canada and around the world. 
 Manufactured products include paper, high technology equipment, aerospace technology, automobiles, machinery, food, clothing and many other goods. Our largest international trading partner is the United States. 
 Natural resources industries include forestry, fishing, agriculture, mining and energy. 
 These industries have played an important part in the country’s history and development. Today, the economy of many areas of the country still depends on developing natural resources, and a large percentage of Canada’s exports are natural resources commodities. 
 61 
 Canada enjoys close relations with the United States and each is the other’s largest trading partner. Over three-quarters of Canadian exports are destined for the U.S.A. In fact we have the biggest bilateral trading relationship in the world. Integrated Canada-U.S.A. supply chains compete with the rest of the world. Canada exports billions of dollars worth of energy products, industrial goods, machinery, equipment, automotive, agricultural, fishing and forestry products, and consumer goods every year. Millions of Canadians and Americans cross every year and in safety what is traditionally known as “the world’s longest undefended border.” 
 At Blaine in the State of Washington, the Peace Arch, inscribed with the words “children of a common mother” and “brethren dwelling together in unity,” symbolizes our close ties and common interests. 
 (From Left to Right Top to Bottom) 
 Car assembly plant in Oakville, Ontario 
 Port of Vancouver 
 Research laboratory 
 RIM’s BlackBerry 
 Ice wine grapes, Niagara Region, Ontario 
 p 
 62 
 The Peace Arch at Blaine, Washington 
 63 
 Canada’s Regions 
 Canada is the second largest country on earth—10 million square kilometres. Three oceans line Canada’s frontiers: the Pacific Ocean in the west, the Atlantic Ocean in the east, and the Arctic Ocean to the north. Along the southern edge of Canada lies the Canada-United States boundary. Both Canada and the U.S.A. are committed to a safe, secure and efficient frontier. 
 The Regions of Canada 
 Canada includes many different geographical areas and five distinct regions. 
 The Atlantic Provinces 
 Central Canada 
 The Prairie Provinces 
 The West Coast 
 The Northern Territories 
 The National Capital 
 Ottawa, located on the Ottawa River, was chosen as the capital in 1857 by Queen Victoria, the great-great-grandmother of Queen Elizabeth II. Today it is Canada’s fourth largest metropolitan area. The National Capital Region, 4,700 square kilometres surrounding Ottawa, preserves and enhances the area’s built heritage and natural environment. 
 Provinces and Territories 
 Canada has ten provinces and three territories. Each province and territory has its own capital city. You should know the capital of your province or territory as well as that of Canada. 
 Population 
 Canada has a population of about 34 million people. While the majority live in cities, Canadians also live in small towns, rural areas and everywhere in between. 
 (From Left to Rigth) 
 Ottawa’s Rideau Canal, once a military waterway, is now a tourist attraction and winter skateway Banff National Park, Alberta 
 Peggy’s Cove harbour, Nova Scotia 
 p 
 REGION 
 PROVINCE/TERRITORY CAPITAL CITY 
 64 
 Newfoundland and Labrador 
 St. John’s 
 Atlantic Provinces 
 Prince Edward Island 
 Charlottetown 
 Nova Scotia 
 Halifax 
 New Brunswick 
 Fredericton 
 Central Canada 
 Quebec 
 Québec City 
 Ontario 
 Toronto 
 Manitoba 
 Winnipeg 
 Prairie Provinces 
 Saskatchewan 
 Regina 
 Alberta 
 Edmonton 
 West Coast 
 British Columbia 
 Victoria 
 Nunavut 
 Iqaluit 
 North 
 Northwest Territories 
 Yellowknife 
 Yukon Territory 
 Whitehorse 
 P 
 THE ATLANTIC PROVINCES 
 Atlantic Canada’s coasts and natural resources, including fishing, farming, forestry and mining, have made these provinces an important part of Canada’s history and development. The Atlantic Ocean brings cool winters and cool humid summers. 
 65 
 Newfoundland and Labrador 
 Newfoundland and Labrador is the most easterly point in North America and has its own time zone. In addition to its natural beauty, the province has a unique heritage linked to the sea. 
 The oldest colony of the British Empire and a strategic prize in Canada’s early history, the province has long been known for its fisheries, coastal fishing villages and distinct culture. 
 Today off-shore oil and gas extraction contributes a substantial part of the economy. Labrador also has immense hydro-electric resources. 
 Prince Edward Island 
 Prince Edward Island (P.E.I.) is the smallest province, known for its beaches, red soil and agriculture, especially potatoes. P.E.I. is the birthplace of Confederation, connected to mainland Canada by one of the longest continuous multispan bridges in the world, the Confederation Bridge. Anne of Green Gables, set in P.E.I. by Lucy Maud Montgomery, is a much-loved story about the adventures of a little red-headed orphan girl. 
 Nova Scotia 
 Nova Scotia is the most populous Atlantic Province, with a rich history as the gateway to Canada. Known for the world’s highest tides in the Bay of Fundy, the province’s identity is linked to shipbuilding, fisheries and shipping. As Canada’s largest east coast port, deep-water and ice-free, the capital, Halifax, has played an important role in Atlantic trade and defence and is home to Canada’s largest naval base. Nova Scotia has a long history of coal mining, forestry and agriculture. Today there is also off-shore oil and gas exploration. The province’s Celtic and Gaelic traditions sustain a vibrant culture. Nova Scotia is home to over 700 annual festivals, including the spectacular military tattoo in Halifax.New Brunswick Situated in the Appalachian Range, the province was founded by the United Empire Loyalists and has the second largest river system on North America’s Atlantic coastline, the St. John River system. Forestry, agriculture, fisheries, mining, food processing and tourism are the 66 
 principal industries. Saint John is the largest city, port and manufacturing centre; Moncton is the principal Francophone Acadian centre; and Fredericton, the historic capital. New Brunswick is the only officially bilingual province, and about one-third of the population lives and works in French. The province’s pioneer Loyalist and French cultural heritage and history come alive in street festivals and traditional music. 
 CENTRAL CANADA 
 More than half the people in Canada live in cities and towns near the Great Lakes and the St. 
 Lawrence River in southern Quebec and Ontario, known as Central Canada and the industrial and manufacturing heartland. Southern Ontario and Quebec have cold winters and warm humid summers. Together, Ontario and Quebec produce more than three-quarters of all Canadian manufactured goods. 
 Quebec 
 Nearly eight million people live in Quebec, the vast majority along or near the St. Lawrence River. More than three-quarters speak French as their first language. The resources of the Canadian Shield have helped Quebec to develop important industries, including forestry, energy and mining. Quebec is Canada’s main producer of pulp and paper. The province’s huge supply of fresh water has made it Canada’s largest producer of hydro-electricity. 
 Quebecers are leaders in cutting-edge industries such as pharmaceuticals and aeronautics. 
 Quebec films, music, literary works and food have international stature, especially in La Francophonie, an association of French-speaking nations. Montreal, Canada’s second largest city and the second largest mainly French-speaking city in the world after Paris, is famous for its cultural diversity. 
 Ontario 
 At more than 12 million, the people of Ontario make up more than one-third of Canadians. The large and culturally diverse population, natural resources and strategic location contribute to a vital economy. Toronto is the largest city in Canada and the country’s main financial centre. 
 Many people work in the service or manufacturing industries, which produce a large percentage of Canada’s exports. The Niagara region is known for its vineyards, wines and fruit crops. Ontario farmers raise dairy and beef cattle, poultry, and vegetable and grain crops. 
 Founded by United Empire Loyalists, Ontario also has the largest French-speaking population 67 
 outside of Quebec, with a proud history of preserving their language and culture. There are five Great Lakes located between Ontario and the United States: Lake Ontario, Lake Erie, Lake Huron, Lake Michigan (in the U.S.A.) and Lake Superior, the largest freshwater lake in the world. 
 THE PRAIRIE PROVINCES 
 Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta are the Prairie Provinces, rich in energy resources and some of the most fertile farmland in the world. The region is mostly dry, with cold winters and hot summers. 
 Manitoba 
 Manitoba’s economy is based on agriculture, mining and hydro-electric power generation. The province’s most populous city is Winnipeg, whose Exchange District includes the most famous street intersection in Canada, Portage and Main. Winnipeg’s French Quarter, St. Boniface, has Western Canada’s largest Francophone community at 45,000. Manitoba is also an important centre of Ukrainian culture, with 14% reporting Ukrainian origins, and the largest Aboriginal population of any province, at over 15%. 
 Saskatchewan 
 Saskatchewan, once known as the “breadbasket of the world” and the “wheat province,” has 40% of the arable land in Canada and is the country’s largest producer of grains and oilseeds. 
 It also boasts the world’s richest deposits of uranium and potash, used in fertilizer, and produces oil and natural gas. Regina, the capital, is home to the training academy of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. Saskatoon, the largest city, is the headquarters of the mining industry and an important educational, research and technology centre. 
 Alberta 
 Alberta is the most populous Prairie province. The province, and the world-famous Lake Louise in the Rocky Mountains, were both named after Princess Louise Caroline Alberta, fourth daughter of Queen Victoria. Alberta has five national parks, including Banff National Park, established in 1885. The rugged Badlands house some of the world’s richest deposits of 68 
 prehistoric fossils and dinosaur finds. Alberta is the largest producer of oil and gas, and the oil sands in the north are being developed as a major energy source. Alberta is also renowned for agriculture, especially for the vast cattle ranches that make Canada one of the world’s major beef producers. 
 THE WEST COAST 
 British Columbia is known for its majestic mountains and as Canada’s Pacific gateway. The Port of Vancouver, Canada’s largest and busiest, handles billions of dollars in goods traded around the world. Warm airstreams from the Pacific Ocean give the B.C. coast a temperate climate. 
 British Columbia 
 British Columbia (B.C.), on the Pacific coast, is Canada’s westernmost province, with a population of four million. The Port of Vancouver is our gateway to the Asia-Pacific. About one-half of all the goods produced in B.C. are forestry products, including lumber, newsprint, and pulp and paper products—the most valuable forestry industry in Canada. B.C. is also known for mining, fishing, and the fruit orchards and wine industry of the Okanagan Valley. B.C. has the most extensive park system in Canada, with approximately 600 provincial parks. The province’s large Asian communities have made Chinese and Punjabi the most spoken languages in the cities after English. The capital, Victoria, is a tourist centre and headquarters of the navy’s Pacific fleet. 
 THE NORTHERN TERRITORIES 
 The Northwest Territories, Nunavut and Yukon contain one-third of Canada’s land mass but have a population of only 100,000. There are gold, lead, copper, diamond and zinc mines. Oil and gas deposits are being developed. The North is often referred to as the “Land of the Midnight Sun” because at the height of summer, daylight can last up to 24 hours. In winter, the sun disappears and darkness sets in for three months. The Northern territories have long cold winters and short cool summers. Much of the North is made up of tundra, the vast rocky Arctic plain. Because of the cold Arctic climate, there are no trees on the tundra and the soil is permanently frozen. Some continue to earn a living by hunting, fishing and trapping. Inuit art is sold throughout Canada and around the world. 
 Yukon 
 Thousands of miners came to the Yukon during the Gold Rush of the 1890s, as celebrated in the poetry of Robert W. Service. Mining remains a significant part of the economy. The White 69 
 Pass and Yukon Railway opened from Skagway in neighbouring Alaska to the territorial capital, Whitehorse, in 1900 and provides a spectacular tourist excursion across precipitous passes and bridges. Yukon holds the record for the coldest temperature ever recorded in Canada (-63°C). 
 Mount Logan, located in the Yukon, is the highest mountain in Canada. It is named in honour of Sir William Logan, a world-famous geologist, born in Montreal in 1798 to Scottish immigrant parents. Logan founded and directed the Geological Survey of Canada from 1842 to 1869 and is considered one of Canada’s greatest scientists P 
 Northwest Territories 
 The Northwest Territories (N.W.T.) were originally made up in 1870 from Rupert’s Land and the North-Western Territory. The capital, Yellowknife (population 20,000), is called the 
 “diamond capital of North America.” More than half the population is Aboriginal (Dene, Inuit and Métis). The Mackenzie River, at 4,200 kilometres, is the second-longest river system in North America after the Mississippi and drains an area of 1.8 million square kilometres. 
 Nunavut 
 Nunavut, meaning “our land” in Inuktitut, was established in 1999 from the eastern part of the Northwest Territories, including all of the former District of Keewatin. The capital is Iqaluit, formerly Frobisher Bay, named after the English explorer Martin Frobisher, who penetrated the uncharted Arctic for Queen Elizabeth I in 1576. The 19-member Legislative Assembly chooses a premier and ministers by consensus. The population is about 85% Inuit, and Inuktitut is an official language and the first language in schools. 
 The Canadian Rangers 
 Canada’s vast North brings security and sovereignty challenges. Dealing with harsh weather conditions in an isolated region, the Canadian Rangers, part of the Canadian Forces Reserves (militia), play a key role. Drawing on indigenous knowledge and experience, the Rangers travel by snowmobile in the winter and all-terrain vehicles in the summer from Resolute to the 70 
 Magnetic North Pole, and keep the flag flying in Canada’s Arctic. 
 (From Left to Right) 
 An Inuit boy in Sanikiluaq, Nunavut, uses a pellet gun to hunt for birds The caribou (reindeer) is popular game for hunters and a symbol of Canada’s North P 
 71 
 Study Questions 
 One of the basic requirements of citizenship is to demonstrate that you have adequate knowledge of Canada. The citizenship test is used to assess your knowledge of Canada and the rights and responsibilities of being a citizen in Canada. 
 All the citizenship test questions are based on information provided in this study guide. You will be asked about facts and ideas presented in the guide. 
 The questions below are similar to the questions that are found on the citizenship test. Use these questions to prepare for your test. All the answers can be found in this study guide. 
 What are three responsibilities of citizenship? 
 a) Being loyal to Canada, recycling newspapers, serving in the navy, army or air force. 
 b) Obeying the law, taking responsibility for oneself and one’s family, serving on a jury. 
 c) Learning both official languages, voting in elections, belonging to a union. 
 d) Buying Canadian products, owning your own business, using less water. 
 What is the meaning of the Remembrance Day poppy? 
 a) To remember our Sovereign, Queen Elizabeth II. 
 b) To celebrate Confederation. 
 c) To honour prime ministers who have died. 
 d) To remember the sacrifice of Canadians who have served or died in wars up to the present day. 
 How are members of Parliament chosen? 
 a) They are appointed by the United Nations. 
 b) They are chosen by the provincial premiers. 
 c) They are elected by voters in their local constituency (riding). 
 d) They are elected by landowners and police chiefs. 
 OTHER STUDY QUESTIONS 
 Name two key documents that contain our rights and freedoms. 
 Identify four (4) rights that Canadians enjoy. 
 Name four (4) fundamental freedoms that Canadians enjoy. 
 What is meant by the equality of women and men? 
 72 
 What are some examples of taking responsibility for yourself and your family? 
 Who were the founding peoples of Canada? 
 Who are the Métis? 
 What does the word “Inuit” mean? 
 What is meant by the term “responsible government”? 
 Who was Sir Louis-Hippolyte La Fontaine? 
 What did the Canadian Pacific Railway symbolize? 
 What does Confederation mean? 
 What is the significance of the discovery of insulin by Sir Frederick Banting and Charles Best? 
 What does it mean to say that Canada is a constitutional monarchy? 
 What are the three branches of government? 
 What is the difference between the role of the Queen and that of the Prime Minister? 
 What is the highest honour that Canadians can receive? 
 When you go to vote on election day, what do you do? 
 Who is entitled to vote in Canadian federal elections? 
 In Canada, are you obliged to tell other people how you voted? 
 After an election, which party forms the government? 
 Who is your member of Parliament? 
 What are the three levels of government? 
 What is the role of the courts in Canada? 
 In Canada, are you allowed to question the police about their service or conduct? 
 Name two Canadian symbols. 
 73 
 What provinces are referred to as the Atlantic Provinces? 
 What is the capital of the province or territory that you live in? 
 74 
 For More Information 
 CANADIAN CITIZENSHIP 
 Obtain citizenship application information and take advantage of the many resources that are available. 
 By telephone 
 Call Centre Number 
 For all areas within Canada, 
 call 1-888-242-2100 (toll-free). 
 Online 
 Visit the Citizenship and Immigration website 
 at www.cic.gc.ca . Discover Canada can be downloaded from this website. 
 CITIZENSHIP CLASSES 
 Contact schools and colleges in your area. 
 Go to your local library or community centre. 
 Contact local settlement agencies or ethnocultural associations. 
 CANADA 
 Ask a librarian to help you find books and videos about Canada. You could begin by asking for these books: 
 The Canada Yearbook 
 (published by Statistics Canada) 
 Canada: A Portrait 
 (published by Statistics Canada) 
 How Canadians Govern Themselves 
 (written by Eugene Forsey. It can be found online at the Library of Parliament at 
 www.parl.gc.ca) 
 The Canadian Encyclopedia 
 (including The Youth Encyclopedia of Canada) www.thecanadianencyclopedia.com 
 The Story of Canada 
 (written by Janet Lunn and Christopher Moore, published by Lester Publishing Ltd.) Symbols of Canada 
 (published by Canadian Heritage) 
 A Crown of Maples 
 (published by Canadian Heritage) 
 Canada: A People’s History 
 (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 
 75 
 Canada’s History 
 (published by Canada’s National History Society) 
 Kayak: Canada’s History Magazine for Kids (published by Canada’s National History Society) FEDERAL PROGRAMS AND SERVICES 
 You can obtain information about Canada by telephone or on the Internet: Telephone: 
 1-800-O-Canada (1-800-622-6232) (toll-free) 
 1-800-465-7735 – TTY (toll-free) 
 Internet: 
 The Government of Canada website contains information about many government programs and services. It can be found at www.canada.gc.ca. 
 Other websites of interest that provide information on topics found in this guide About Canada 
 The Crown and the Governor General 
 www.gg.ca 
 Canadian Heritage 
 www.pch.gc.ca 
 Atlas of Canada 
 http://atlas.nrcan.gc.ca/site/index.html 
 Teachers and Youth Corner 
 www.cic.gc.ca/english/games/index.asp 
 Parks Canada 
 www.parkscanada.gc.ca 
 Institute for Canadian Citizenship 
 www.icc-icc.ca 
 The Historica-Dominion Institute 
 www.historica-dominion.ca 
 The Canadian Experience—A Civic Literacy Project for the New Mainstream 
 www.cdnexperience.ca 
 Canadian History 
 Canadian Confederation 
 www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/confederation/index-e.html 
 Confederation for Kids 
 www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/confederation/kids/index-e.html 
 First Among Equals: The Prime Minister in Canadian Life and Politics 
 www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/primeministers 
 76 
 Virtual Museum of Canada 
 www.virtualmuseum.ca 
 Canadian War Museum 
 www.warmuseum.ca 
 Canadian Black History 
 www.cic.gc.ca/english/games/museum/main.asp 
 Military History and Remembrance 
 A Day of Remembrance 
 www.vac-acc.gc.ca/content/history/other/remember/dayremembrance.pdf 
 Heroes and Poppies – 
 An Introduction to Remembrance 
 Available in hard copy version only. Order at: https://crorders-commandescss.vac- 
 acc.gc.ca/order.php?m=item_list&c=EducationKits 
 Canada Remembers 
 www.vac-acc.gc.ca/remembers/sub.cfm?source=history/infosheets 
 Historical booklets 
 www.vac-acc.gc.ca/remembers/sub.cfm?source=history/series 
 Government 
 Parliament of Canada 
 www.parl.gc.ca 
 I Can Vote! 
 www.elections.ca 
 Canada’s System of Justice 
 www.justice.gc.ca/eng/dept-min/pub/just 
 Geography 
 Geography Quizzes 
 http://atlas.nrcan.gc.ca/site/english/learningresources/quizzes/index.html 
 For a “Greener” Canada 
 Sustainable Development 
 www.pc.gc.ca/docs/pc/strat/sdd-sds-2007/index_e.asp 
 Being Energy Efficient 
 www.nrcan.gc.ca/eneene/effeff/index-eng.php 
 Getting Involved 
 Volunteer Canada 
 www.volunteer.ca 
 77 
 Volunteer Opportunities Related to the Environment 
 www.ec.gc.ca/education/default.asp?lang=En&n=0FD21FB8-1 
 Travel in Canada 
 Newfoundland and Labrador 
 www.newfoundlandlabrador.com 
 Prince Edward Island 
 www.gentleisland.com 
 Nova Scotia 
 www.novascotia.com 
 New Brunswick 
 www.tourismnewbrunswick.ca 
 Quebec 
 www.bonjourquebec.com 
 Ontario 
 www.ontariotravel.net 
 Manitoba 
 www.travelmanitoba.com 
 Saskatchewan 
 www.sasktourism.com 
 Alberta 
 www.travelalberta.com 
 British Columbia 
 www.hellobc.com 
 Nunavut 
 www.nunavuttourism.com 
 Northwest Territories 
 www.spectacularnwt.com 
 Yukon Territory 
 www.travelyukon.com 
 78 
 The Confederation Bridge joins the provinces of New Brunswick and Prince Edward Island. At almost 13 kilometres in length, the bridge is the longest in the world to cross water that freezes in winter p 
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 Government of Canada Departments and Agencies 
 Canadian Heritage 
 Canadian Human Rights Commission 
 Citizenship and Immigration Canada 
 Office of the Commissioner of Official Languages 
 Elections Canada 
 Environment Canada 
 Indian and Northern Affairs Canada 
 Industry Canada 
 Justice Canada 
 Library and Archives Canada 
 Library of Parliament 
 Natural Resources Canada 
 Parks Canada 
 Veterans Affairs Canada 
 Organizations 
 Canada’s National History Society 
 Fédération des communautés francophones 
 et acadienne du Canada (FCFA) 
 The Historica-Dominion Institute 
 Institute for Canadian Citizenship 
 Individuals 
 Dr. Janet Ajzenstat 
 Mr. Curtis Barlow 
 Dr. Randy Boyagoda 
 79 
 Mr. Marc Chalifoux 
 General John de Chastelain 
 The Rt. Hon. Adrienne Clarkson 
 Mr. Andrew Cohen 
 Mr. Alex Colville 
 Ms. Ann Dadson 
 Dr. Xavier Gélinas 
 Dr. Jack Granatstein 
 Mr. Rudyard Griffiths 
 Dr. Lynda Haverstock 
 Dr. Peter Henshaw 
 Dr. D. Michael Jackson 
 Senator Serge Joyal 
 Dr. Margaret MacMillan 
 Dr. Christopher McCreery 
 Mr. James Marsh 
 Fr. Jacques Monet, SJ 
 Dr. Jim Miller 
 Ms. Deborah Morrison 
 Dr. Desmond Morton 
 Mr. Bernard Pothier 
 Mr. Colin Robertson 
 Dr. John Ralston Saul 
 80 
 Photo Credits 
 PHOTO DESCRIPTION 
 PHOTO CREDIT 
 Stock image 
 Inukshuk, Nunavut 
 Canadian Forces Combat Camera 
 Canadian War Veteran 
 Master Corporal Frank Hudec 
 Moose 
 Ontario Tourism 
 Parliament Hill 
 Stock image 
 Salon bleu (Blue Hall) 
 Quebec National Assembly 
 Canoeing on the Rideau Canal 
 Canadian Tourism Commission 
 Queen Elizabeth II, Queen of Canada 
 Canadian Heritage 
 Citizenship and Immigration 
 Taking the oath of citizenship 
 Canada 
 Family 
 Stock image 
 Parliament Hill 
 Canadian Tourism Commission 
 Boy holding Canadian flags 
 Stock image 
 Bay of Fundy Trail, New Brunswick 
 Canadian Tourism Commission 
 The Arches Provincial Park, 
 Canadian Tourism Commission 
 Newfoundland and Labrador 
 Kensington Market, Toronto, Ontario 
 Canadian Tourism Commission 
 Canada Day parade in Banff, Alberta 
 Town of Banff 
 Village historique acadien, New Brunswick 
 Canadian Tourism Commission 
 Esgenoopetitj First Nation 
 Canadian Tourism Commission 
 (Burnt Church First Nation) New Brunswick 
 Kayak, Iceberg Alley, Newfoundland and Labrador 
 Canadian Tourism Commission 
 Eagle Canyon Bridge, Ontario 
 Canadian Tourism Commission 
 Citizenship and Immigration 
 Taking the oath of citizenship 
 Canada 
 Citizenship and Immigration 
 Taking the oath of citizenship 
 Canada 
 Taking the oath of citizenship 
 MaRS Discovery District 
 Canadian passport 
 Passport Canada 
 Citizenship and Immigration 
 Boy at citizenship ceremony 
 Canada 
 Citizenship and Immigration 
 Citizenship Judge and Mountie 
 Canada 
 Citizenship and Immigration 
 Family at citizenship ceremony 
 Canada 
 Library and Archives Canada PA- 
 Queen Elizabeth II, Queen of Canada 
 141503 
 81 
 Woman donating blood 
 Stock image 
 Children’s program 
 Debbie Farnand 
 Man and woman 
 Stock image 
 Canadian Army General and Navy sailor shaking hands 
 National Defence 
 National Defence – 
 Canadian Air Force Pilot 
 Master Corporal John Bradley 
 Canadian Forces participating in the annual Nijmegen Marches in the Canadian Forces Combat Camera 
 Netherlands 
 Master Corporal Robert Bottrill 
 Métis from Alberta 
 Fred Cattroll 
 Cree dancer 
 Fred Cattroll 
 Inuit children in Iqaluit, Nunavut 
 Fred Cattroll 
 Haida artist Bill Reid carves a totem pole 
 Chris Hopkins 
 Library and Archives Canada – 
 Lord Tweedsmuir, Governor General of Canada (novelist John Yousuf Karsh 
 Buchan), in native attire 
 (Year of the Portrait) 
 St. Patrick’s Day Parade, Montreal, Quebec 
 Jimmy James 
 Highland dancer at Glengarry 
 Mario Groleau 
 Highland Games, Maxville, Ontario 
 Celebrating Fête Nationale, Gatineau, Quebec 
 Patrick Guillot 
 Acadian fiddler, Village of Grande-Anse, 
 Canadian Tourism Commission 
 New Brunswick 
 Celebration of Cultures, Edmonton, Alberta 
 Canadian Tourism Commission 
 Ismaili Muslims in the Calgary Stampede, Alberta 
 Ismaili Council 
 Caribbean cultural festival, Toronto, Ontario 
 Ontario Tourism 
 Vegreville and District Chamber of 
 Ukrainian Pysanka Festival, Vegreville, Alberta 
 Commerce 
 Young Polish dancers in Oliver, British Columbia 
 Stock image 
 National Defence – Corporal Bern 
 Pipes and drums in Ottawa 
 LeBlanc 
 Winter fun in Whistler, British Columbia 
 Canadian Tourism Commission 
 Kids playing hockey in the street 
 Paul Chambers 
 Sailing, Toronto Harbour 
 Canadian Tourism Commission 
 Cadets white-water rafting 
 Cadets Canada 
 Christmas in Gatineau, Quebec 
 Rob Wiebe 
 Chinese Canadian Military Museum 
 Chinese-Canadian War Veterans 
 Society 
 Notre-Dame-des-Victoires, Québec City 
 Stock image 
 Chinese New Year celebration, 
 Paul Clarke 
 Vancouver, British Columbia 
 Olympian Marjorie Turner-Bailey of Nova Scotia 
 The Black Loyalist Heritage Society 
 Library and Archives Canada C- 
 Indian encampment, fur trade era 
 040293 
 82 
 John Cabot 
 Oil on canvas by Ernest Board 
 Bristol’s City Museum and Art 
 Gallery 
 Library and Archives Canada C- 
 Jacques Cartier 
 011226 
 Library and Archives Canada C- 
 Count Frontenac 
 073710 
 Pierre Le Moyne 
 Louisiana State Museum 
 Library and Archives Canada C- 
 Sir Guy Carleton 
 002833 
 The first elected Assembly of Lower Canada, 
 Collection of the National Assembly 
 in Québec City 
 of Quebec 
 Lieutenant-Colonel John Graves Simcoe, 
 Library and Archives Canada C- 
 Upper Canada’s first Lieutenant Governor 
 008111 
 Library and Archives Canada C- 
 Mary Ann Shadd Cary 
 029977 
 HMS Shannon , a Royal Navy frigate, 
 Nova Scotia Archives and Records 
 leads the captured USS Chesapeake 
 Management N-2301 and CN-1139 
 into Halifax harbour, 1813 
 Library and Archives Canada C- 
 Major-General Sir Isaac Brock and Chief Tecumseh 
 011052 
 Militiaman, Lower Canada 
 French-Canadian militiaman illustration 
 Sedentary Militia, 1813 G.A. 
 Embleton, © Parks Canada 
 Duke of Wellington 
 Public Domain 
 Laura Secord 
 Canada Post 
 House of Commons Collection, 
 The Fathers of Confederation 
 Ottawa 
 (Artist – Rex Woods) 
 Library and Archives Canada C- 
 Sir Louis-Hippolyte La Fontaine 
 005961 
 National Currency Collection 
 Dominion of Canada one-dollar note, 1923 
 Currency Museum, Bank of Canada 
 Sir John A. Macdonald, the first 
 Library and Archives Canada C- 
 Prime Minister of the Dominion of Canada 
 006536 
 Interior of Old Fort Garry 
 Shaun Mayberry, Mayberry Fine Art 
 Library and Archives Canada PA- 
 Sir Sam Steele 
 028147 
 Library and Archives Canada PA- 
 Gabriel Dumont 
 117943 
 Members of the train crew pose 
 Canadian Pacific Archives A17566 
 with a westbound Pacific Express 
 Chinese workers’ camp on the CPR, 
 Library and Archives Canada C- 
 Kamloops, B.C., 1886 
 021990 
 Sergeant, Fort Garry Horse, 
 Department of National Defence 
 Canadian Expeditionary Force, 1916 
 and Canadian Forces 
 Sir William Newenham Montague 
 83 
 Lieutenant-General Sir Arthur Currie, 1919 
 Orpen CWM19710261-0539 
 Beaverbrook Collection of War Art 
 © Canadian War Museum 
 Maple leaf cap badge 
 Maple leaf cap badge from the First World War 
 CWM 19820048-001 
 © Canadian War Museum 
 Canadian Forces Combat Camera 
 The Vimy Memorial in France 
 Sergeant Jerry Kean 
 Library and Archives Canada C- 
 Agnes Macphail 
 006908 
 Richard Mathews 
 CWM 19710261-6070 
 Nursing sister 
 Beaverbrook Collection of War Art 
 © Canadian War Museum 
 Canadian Forces Combat Camera 
 Canadian soldiers observe Remembrance Day 
 Master Corporal Robert Bottrill 
 Remembrance Day poppy 
 Stock image 
 Canadian Forces Combat Camera 
 Canadian war veteran 
 Master Corporal Frank Hudec 
 Scouts with Remembrance Day wreath 
 Patrick Tam 
 Library and Archives Canada PA- 
 Phil Edwards 
 150992 
 The 1st Battalion, The Regina Rifle Regiment, Assault Landing at Royal Regina Rifles Trust Fund 
 Courseulles, France, June 1944 
 Painting by O.N. Fisher, 1950 
 Archibald Bruce Stapleton 
 Give, The Canadian Red Cross 
 CWM 19720114-023 
 © Canadian War Museum 
 Toronto business district 
 Stock image 
 Medical researcher 
 Stock image 
 Vietnamese Canadians 
 Alex Pylyshyn 
 F-86 Sabre, Royal Canadian Air Force 
 National Defence 
 Photo: OSA Images 
 Costume: Marie-Chantale 
 Cirque du Soleil 
 Vaillancourt 
 @ 2007 Cirque du Soleil 
 Tom Thomson painting © National 
 The Jack Pine, 1916–1917 
 Gallery of Canada, Ottawa 
 COC/The Canadian Press/Claus 
 Donovan Bailey 
 Andersen 
 Canadian Paralympic Committee 
 Chantal Petitclerc 
 Benoit Pelosse 
 Terry Fox 
 Ed Linkewich 
 The Canadian Press – Mike 
 Wayne Gretzky 
 Ridewood 
 Mark Tewksbury 
 The Canadian Press – Ted Grant 
 Adaptation by Henry Garman for the 
 Paul Henderson 
 84 
 Power to Change Campaign, 2008 
 Catriona Le May Doan 
 The Canadian Press 
 Canadian football 
 The Saskatchewan Roughriders 
 The Canadarm2 
 Canadian Space Agency 
 Library and Archives Canada PA- 
 Sir Frederick Banting 
 123481 
 Queen Elizabeth II opening the 23rd Parliament (1957) 
 Photograph by Malak, Ottawa 
 Parliament Hill 
 Stock image 
 His Excellency the Right Honourable David Johnston 
 Sun Media 
 House of Commons chamber 
 Parliament of Canada 
 House of Commons in session 
 House of Commons 
 Voter information card 
 Elections Canada 
 Government of Prince Edward 
 Provincial Assembly at Charlottetown, P.E.I. 
 Island 
 Québec City Hall 
 Stacey M. Warnke 
 Citizenship and Immigration 
 Scales of Justice, Vancouver Law Courts 
 Canada 
 Border guard with sniffer dog 
 Canada Border Services Agency 
 Jury benches 
 Dan Carr 
 Ottawa police constable Steve Lewis helping a young boy at the Ottawa Police Service 
 Aboriginal Day Flotilla 
 Handcuffs 
 Correctional Services Canada 
 House of Commons Collection 
 Ottawa Goldsmiths & Silversmiths 
 Mace of the House of Commons, Ottawa 
 Company 
 (Great Britain) 
 Canadian flag of 1965 
 Stock image 
 The Royal Arms of Canada 
 Bank of Canada 
 Parliament at dusk 
 Stock image 
 The Snowbirds 
 National Defence 
 Patrick Riley, Dominion Command, 
 The Red Ensign 
 The Royal Canadian Legion 
 Montreal Canadiens, Stanley Cup champions, 1978 
 CHC – Denis Brodeur 
 RCMP Musical Ride, Ottawa, Ontario 
 Patrick Guillot 
 The beaver 
 Stock image 
 Library and Archives Canada/John 
 Oscar Peterson, Norah Willis Michener and Governor General Roland Evans Michener, 1973 
 e002107535-v6 
 Colonel Alexander Roberts Dunn, V.C. 
 Sharif Tarabay 
 Able Seaman William Hall, V.C. 
 © 2010 Canada Post 
 Adam Sherriff Scott 
 CWM 19710261-5841 
 Brigadier Paul Triquet, V.C. 
 Beaverbrook Collection of War Art 
 85 
 © Canadian War Museum 
 Arthur Ambrose McEvoy 
 CWM 19710261-6070 
 Sergeant Filip Konowal, V.C. 
 Beaverbrook Collection of War Art 
 © Canadian War Museum 
 Alphonse Jongers 
 Honorary Air Marshal William Avery Bishop, V.C., 
 CWM 19680068-001 Beaverbrook 
 DSO and Bar, MC, DFC 
 Collection of War Art © Canadian 
 War Museum 
 Lieutenant Robert Hampton Gray, V.C. 
 Sharif Tarabay 
 Lumber truck 
 Stock image 
 Oil pump jacks in southern Alberta 
 Stock image 
 Atlantic lobster 
 Stock image 
 Hydro-electric dam on the Saguenay River, Quebec 
 Stock image 
 Citizenship and Immigration 
 Toronto’s financial district 
 Canada 
 The Peace Arch at Blaine, Washington 
 Leo Chen 
 Car assembly plant in Oakville, Ontario 
 Ford of Canada 
 Port of Vancouver 
 Evan Leeson 
 Research laboratory 
 The Canadian Press – Darryl Dyck 
 RIM’s BlackBerry 
 Stock image 
 Ice wine grapes, Niagara Region, Ontario 
 Stock image 
 Ottawa’s Rideau Canal 
 Stock image 
 Banff National Park 
 Stock image 
 Peggy’s Cove harbour 
 Stock image 
 “The Edge,” Newfoundland and Labrador 
 Canadian Tourism Commission 
 Moose 
 Ontario Tourism 
 Point Prim, Prince Edward Island 
 Canadian Tourism Commission 
 Anne of Green Gables, Prince Edward Island 
 Smudge 9000 
 Destroyer HMCS Athabasca (DD282), in the foreground, and HMCS 
 Canadian Forces Combat Camera 
 Toronto (FF333) sail through Halifax Harbour on February 17, 2009, Private Martin Roy 
 for an annual sailpast 
 Cabot Trail, Nova Scotia 
 Stock image 
 Hopewell Rocks, Bay of Fundy, New Brunswick 
 Canadian Tourism Commission 
 Whale 
 Canadian Tourism Commission 
 Rocher Percé 
 Stock image 
 Petit Champlain, Québec City 
 Stock image 
 Muskoka Skeleton Lake, Ontario 
 Ontario Tourism 
 Toronto skyline 
 Stock image 
 Pisew Falls, Manitoba 
 Stock image 
 Golden Boy statue 
 Government of Manitoba 
 Wheat fields in Saskatchewan 
 Stock image 
 86 
 Coronach, Saskatchewan 
 Canadian Tourism Commission 
 Alberta rancher 
 Stock image 
 Alberta oil pump jack 
 Stock image 
 Vancouver skyline 
 Stock image 
 Orca 
 Stock image 
 Family searching for gold, Dawson City, Yukon 
 Canadian Tourism Commission 
 Takhini Hot Springs Road, Yukon 
 Canadian Tourism Commission 
 Sir William Logan 
 Natural Resources Canada 
 Mount Logan 
 Natural Resources Canada 
 Northern lights, Northwest Territories 
 Canadian Tourism Commission 
 Polar bear 
 Stock image 
 Pangnirtung, Nunavut 
 Lindsay Terry 
 Inukshuk, Nunavut 
 Stock image 
 The Canadian Rangers 
 National Defence 
 An Inuit boy in Sanikiluaq, Nunavut 
 Clarkework Orange Photography 
 The caribou (reindeer) 
 David Cartier 
 Confederation Bridge 
 Stephen Downes 
 Library and Archives Canada C- 
 Sir Wilfrid Laurier 
 001971 
 Library and Archives Canada C- 
 John Diefenbaker 
 006779 
 2010 men’s hockey Olympic gold medal winners 
 Getty Images 
 87 
 Authorities 
 Section 5 of the Citizenship Act 
 5. (1) The Minister shall grant citizenship to any person who: (e) has an adequate knowledge of Canada and the responsibilities and privileges of citizenship. 
 Section 15 of the Citizenship Regulations 
 KNOWLEDGE OF CANADA AND CITIZENSHIP CRITERIA 
 15. (1) A person is considered to have an adequate knowledge of Canada if they demonstrate, based on their responses to questions prepared by the Minister, that they know the national symbols of Canada and have a general understanding of the following subjects: (a) the chief characteristics of Canadian political and military history; (b) the chief characteristics of Canadian social and cultural history; (c) the chief characteristics of Canadian physical and political geography; (d) the chief characteristics of the Canadian system of government as a constitutional monarchy; and 
 (e) characteristics of Canada other than those referred to in paragraphs (a) to (d). 
 (2) A person is considered to have an adequate knowledge of the responsibilities and privileges of citizenship if they demonstrate, based on their responses to questions prepared by the Minister, that they have a general understanding of the following subjects: (a) participation in the Canadian democratic process; 
 (b) participation in Canadian society, including volunteerism, respect for the environment and the protection of Canada’s natural, cultural and architectural heritage; (c) respect for the rights, freedoms and obligations set out in the laws of Canada; and (d) the responsibilities and privileges of citizenship other than those referred to in paragraphs (a) to (c). 
 88 
 Memorable Quotes 
 “For here [in Canada], 
 I want the marble to remain the marble; 
 the granite to remain the granite; 
 the oak to remain the oak; 
 and out of these elements, 
 I would build a nation great among the nations of the world.” 
 — Sir Wilfrid Laurier 
 7th Prime Minister of Canada 
 July 11, 1896 – October 6, 1911 
 “I am a Canadian, 
 a free Canadian, 
 free to speak without fear, 
 free to worship in my own way, 
 free to stand for what I think right, 
 free to oppose what I believe wrong, 
 or free to choose those 
 who shall govern my country. 
 This heritage of freedom 
 89 
 I pledge to uphold 
 for myself and all mankind.” 
 — John Diefenbaker 
 13th Prime Minister of Canada 
 June 21, 1957 – April 22, 1963 
 These quotes do not need to be learned for the citizenship test. 
 Team Canada won gold in men’s hockey at the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver P 
 DISCOVER CANADA 
 90 
 Table of Contents 
 . 
 3 
 Message to Our Readers 
 4 
 Applying for Citizenship 
 5 
 Rights and Responsibilities of Citizenship 
 7 
 Who We Are 
 10 
 Canada’s History 
 16 
 Modern Canada 
 34 
 How Canadians Govern Themselves 
 40 
 Federal Elections 
 44 
 The Justice System 
 51 
 Canadian Symbols 
 54 
 Canada’s Economy 
 61 
 Canada’s Regions 
 64 
 Study Questions 
 72 
 For More Information 
 75 
 Photo Credits 
 81 
 Authorities 
 88 
 Memorable Quotes 
 89 
 91 
